=== PAGE 416 ===
415
FEARLESS
I also included a fade animation by storing a starting and ending brightness
for each orb, which made the change in lighting much gentler. Finally, I added
in code for a pulsating introductory orb to catch visitor’s attention and explain
the installation.
Coding in Arduino was an interesting challenge in trying to make sure I was
being memory efcient, especially when I had to add in groups and remember
milliseconds (which were stored as unsigned longs). It defnitely made my code more
complex, but I had a really fun time trying to fgure out the challenge.
FFiigg..1122..1122
Lifting up the orb makes it shine at full brightness, and
putting it back down leaves it slightly brighter than
before. I got this interaction working around 1 AM after
a few late nights and I was so deliriously happy.
FFiigg..1122..1133
The Neopixels lighting up with
a staggered delay when the tilt sensor
in my hand is lifted, and dimming down
when the tilt sensor is down.
=== PAGE 417 ===
YELRIHS
614
Production
One of the frst things that Tina did to kick-start the production phase was to 3D At this point, I had
model an enclosure to hold both the tilt sensor (which is very sensitive to the angle to return home (and
then to a conference
of its placement) and Neopixel in place (Figure 12.15, top left). We also received
in Tokyo), so I wasn’t
a brilliant suggestion to use a phone jack to connect our orbs to our wires, so that able to help through
production. I highly
we could make the orbs easily detachable (Figure 12.15, bottom left). That way
recommend reading
if an orb malfunctioned, we could easily separate it and debug it away from the both Tina’s4 and
rest of the installation. Tina incorporated the phone jack into her enclosure design, Christina’s5 write-ups
for more details on this
and together with Christina, 3D printed seventeen of them and spent roughly
section.
30 hours soldering them all.
FFiigg..1122..1144
3D model of the enclosure (top left), the soldered parts
(top right), tilt sensor and Neopixel soldered to a phone
jack within the 3D printed enclosure (bottom left), and
the 3D printed enclosure inside an orb (bottom right).
4 Tina Rungsawang, One Amongst Many: https://tina.pizza/one-amongst-many
5 Christina Dacanay, One Amongst Many—Connecting Women in Computing:
http://www.cdacanay.com/itp-blog/2019/12/23/one-amongst-many-connecting-womxn-in-computing
=== PAGE 418 ===
417
FEARLESS
To hang the orbs from the ceiling, they mapped each woman’s position data to long They pre-labeled the
planks of wood and drilled holes to run the wires through (Figure 12.18). The wires wires to make sure
the correct orbs were
were then plugged into an Arduino Mega, which was powered by an iPhone USB
plugged into the
power adapter connected to a wall plug. correct Arduino pins.
FFiigg..1122..1155
A prototype of the orb
wired up and working
as a stand-alone piece!
FFiigg..1122..1166
Each woman’s
information laser-
etched into acrylic.
FFiigg..1122..1177
Position data mapped to each plank of wood, the
wires taped to the wood and Christina plugging
the wires into the Arduino Mega.
=== PAGE 419 ===
YELRIHS
814
Reflections
It was absolutely incredible to see this whole project come together. We received
great feedback at the Winter Show, where more than 200 people experienced our
installation. Christina and Tina told me stories of young women looking inspired,
of little girls giddily sticking gems on our summary board, but my favorite story is that
of an older woman who had spent her entire life working in computing. As she went
through our installation, she became emotional with the thought that someday,
future generations might come to highlight and recognize her contributions as well.
I’m so happy that we created such meaningful work that has resonated with
so many people, and I’m really grateful for Tina and Christina, the best teammates
I could have pulled of this ambitious project with. I’m also grateful to the teachers,
residents, and students who graciously ofered their time and wisdom; I don’t think
we could have done so much anywhere else except at ITP.
I’m also really happy and grateful that I get to wrap-up Data Sketches with
this project. It encapsulates all of my personal and professional growth from the
last three years; I’ve grown from someone who used to only care about the code,
to someone who also values design and the end experience. I started freelancing
with the hope of learning the kind of challenges I want to work on and the problems
I want to solve. I’ve found them. I want to tell human-centric, data-driven, and
personally meaningful stories. I’ve been able to expand the formats in which
I do this, from 2D to 3D, from digital to physical. As I fnish Data Sketches and
enter a new decade, I’m excited to move onto the next phase of my career and
to boldly, unapologetically, courageously pursue my biggest dreams.
Thank you, Data Sketches, for all of that courage.
FFiigg..1122..1188
Dream team (in our
natural habitat)!
=== PAGE 420 ===
419
FEARLESS
FFiigg..1122..1199
My friend Alice gave me
this card before I left
for ITP and it perfectly
encapsulates my feels
as I wrap up Data
Sketches and move
onto the next phase
of my career.
=== PAGE 421 ===
One Amongst Many
oneamongstmany.com
FFiigg..1122..2233
Summary board where people could place a gem in
the categories (mathematicians, computer scientists,
creatives, and other) they identify most with.
FFiigg..1122..2211
A timelapse of the Winter Show.
More than 200 people came
through our installation!
FFiigg..1122..2244
The major downside of a physical installation is
that people outside of that area can’t experience
it. Because we wanted people around the world to
learn about these women in computing, I created
a digital counterpart with D3.js, Three.js,
Greensock, and Vue.js.
=== PAGE 422 ===
421
FEARLESS
=== PAGE 423 ===
The lessons are grouped into the sections
in which they appear in the chapters.
However, a few lessons appear in multiple
chapters. These have been placed in the
section most appropriate.
422
SNOSSEL
Data
Check Data Accuracy and Completeness
Olympics - Nadieh - page 63
Data Can Be Found in Many Diferent Ways
Presidents & Royals - Shirley - page 135
Books - Nadieh - page 152
Nostalgia - Nadieh - page 218
Nature - Nadieh - page 250
Exploring Data: Ask Questions
Culture - Shirley - page 304
Exploring Data: List Attributes
Travel - Shirley - page 105
Exploring Data: Use Charting Libraries
Community - Shirley - page 336
Manually Add New Variables to Your Data
Movies - Nadieh - page 30
Travel - Nadieh - page 93
Books - Nadieh - page 153
Sketch
Add Context Using Remaining Visual Channels
Olympics - Nadieh - page 64
Music - Nadieh - page 194
Design to Maximize for Delight
Books - Shirley - page 176
Music - Nadieh - page 196
Nostalgia - Nadieh - page 219
Fearless - Nadieh - page 398
Design with Code
Presidents & Royals - Nadieh - page 125
Nature - Nadieh - page 256
Culture - Shirley - page 306
Marks and Channels
Movies - Shirley - page 47
=== PAGE 424 ===
Sketch to Discover and Remove Thinking Errors Remix What’s Out There
Olympics - Nadieh - page 66 Movies - Nadieh - page 38
Travel - Nadieh - page 94 Myths & Legends - Nadieh - page 353
Culture - Nadieh - page 283
Scales in D3.js
Visual Metaphors Movies - Shirley - page 53
Community - Shirley - page 338
SVG vs. Canvas
Olympics - Shirley - page 82
Code
The Extensive Applications of D3.js’ Functions
Community - Nadieh - page 325
Annotations Are of Vital Importance Trigonometry
Myths & Legends - Nadieh - page 362 Travel - Shirley - page 109
Canvas Interactions Web Workers
Books - Shirley - page 181 Nature - Shirley - page 266
Combine Tools
Music - Nadieh - page 200
Fearless - Nadieh - page 399
Custom Animations
Nature - Shirley - page 269
Dataviz for Both Mobile and Desktop
Culture - Nadieh - page 290
Drawing with SVG
Movies - Shirley - page 50
How Scrollytelling Works
Presidents & Royals - Shirley - page 140
Know When to Ask for Help
Community - Nadieh - page 329
Learn to Love Math
Culture - Nadieh - page 287
Myths & Legends - Nadieh - page 350
Fearless - Nadieh - page 390
Outside Strokes with SVG
Music - Nadieh - page 197
Precalculate “Visual” Variables
Olympics - Nadieh - page 68
Books - Nadieh - page 161
Fearless - Nadieh - page 387
423
=== PAGE 425 ===
THE STARTING
AND THE FINISHING
Interview with Series Editor Tamara Munzner
In this interview, we sit down with Tamara Munzner, beyond just the technical. When I went into Data Sketches,
professor of computer science at the University of British I had about four years working as a software engineer on the
Columbia and editor for this series of visualization books, front end. I knew I was strong with D3.js and would be able
to discuss how we came up with the idea for Data Sketches, to create visualizations in SVG or canvas. But when
the “bookifcation” process, and what we plan to do when I frst started, I didn’t know what I didn’t know. I didn’t fully
it’s fnally printed. understand how important the design component would
be. I didn’t know how much there was in terms of data analysis.
This interview has been edited for brevity and clarity. I also didn’t know what it took to tell a compelling and easily
navigable story. All of this is so important to me now, but when
Tamara Munzner: This has been a long process, but you’re I frst started with Data Sketches, I often approached it with
almost done. What do you know now that you didn’t a focus on fun and less of a focus on the end user. But now
know before? I recognize that the end user is extremely important, that their
ability to read and understand the whole visualization
Nadieh Bremer: I learned a lot of new techniques, such as is critical and I should not do something just for the technical
working with WebGL, getting a better grip on canvas, and fun of it. I think that’s my biggest learning lesson, coming
fguring out how to visually render bigger datasets on the in as an engineer but then refocusing to place more emphasis
screen. I also learned how to go from making singular and on design.
smaller visuals to making an entire dataviz-driven story. This
taught me that it’s more than just the visuals and the layout; TM: What fantastic answers. You learn so much when writing
you must be able to design for multiple visuals and make them a book, and what, if anything, did you learn from the process
fow together. That’s what I took away from Data Sketches of bookifcation?
in terms of the technical part. I also learned how extremely
valuable it is to have a teammate that you can go through this SW: Writing is hard! I don’t know about Nadieh, but I know
process with. I didn’t have to do everything on my own, and I really struggled with the bookifcation part. Data Sketches
knowing that Shirley was there for me helped immensely. started out as something we were just doing for fun, so I never
felt the obligation to have the write-ups make 100% sense.
Shirley Wu: I don’t know if I can say that any better than In fact, sometimes I would just dump all the screenshots, add
Nadieh did. It was so valuable to have someone to bounce some words in between and that was my write-up. I think
my ideas of of and to discuss visualizations with. We also that was still helpful for people because they got to see all
went through this whole freelance journey together, learning of those notebook sketches and all of the diferent iterations
together. From a personal perspective, for Data Sketches, of my code. But for the bookifcation part itself, the biggest
the biggest thing for me is that I’ve really expanded my skills struggle I had was having to really think through and explain
424
=== PAGE 426 ===
my process; not just show it, but also explain it. I had to help about the format, too, and we fgured we could just pass code
people understand my thought process and explain why back and forth and maybe it could be a 12-month thing with
I did certain things—which is often, honestly, for no apparent 12 projects. I didn’t even think about how big that would
reason other than simply trying it out. So, I was really be in terms of time commitment. We came up with the format
challenged by turning all my write-ups into applicable in an hour, just shooting ideas back and forth, and we spent
learning lessons. much more time on the name. We literally took two days just
brainstorming the name.
NB: For me in general, the bookifcation and the writing of the
chapters themselves, wasn’t too difcult. I don’t mind writing. TM: Do you have any advice for people who might want
However, I have a tendency to want to explain everything to do something similar?
in lists: “And then I did A and then I did B and then I did C,”
and my write-ups were a lot like that. So as the projects NB: My advice is to thoroughly understand the project before
became bigger, the write-ups became longer and longer and you start and consider placing constraints on how you
longer. For example, my frst write-up was about nine pages approach your work. For example, if we’d placed one, saying
in the book manuscript, and my fnal one started out at 25! that whatever we made after 20 hours, we’d use, it may have
This process taught me how to downsize what information been a little easier. You don’t want to constrain your creativity,
I give to a reader and to present it more succinctly. This, of course, but sometimes constraints can actually make you
in turn, helped me get a better grip on what is interesting and, more creative. I also recommend doing it with somebody else.
conversely, what is just rambling. I learned that it’s not easy Working with Shirley helped with this process a lot and I think
and it was a little bit painful to have to downsize but I’m thrilled the partnership works really well.
with the result and I know people will enjoy the writing better.
I didn’t want to be responsible for making this a 600-page SW: I appreciated that a lot too. Basically, between the two
book, so making it more concise was critical for me. I wanted of us, I prefer to look more into the future and plan for the
to focus on the actual story without going on too many future and Nadieh is so good at making sure that what needs
tangents and potentially losing the reader. The most painful to be done in the present is done in the present. It’s a very
part for me, overall, was mostly the fact that this process has good balance.
been a long one. This book was always in the back of my mind
and that can get kind of stressful, so I really wanted to have TM: I’ve got to say, I think it was a match made in heaven.
it fnished. You were both able to push each other towards doing things
you might not have done individually.
TM: Fair enough. I think the process of creating a book
is always a mix of the logistic and technical, and then just SW: Yeah, defnitely.
the emotional part of doing the thing and making it be done.
It is not at all easy. Can you say a little more about the mindset TM: Both for the starting and for the fnishing, which are
you had when you started the project? Why did you decide two excellent verbs. What are you going to do the day you
this would be a good thing to do? physically pick up a book that is your book?
NB: Well, it seemed like a fun way to make new projects. SW: Cry in joy. Cry with joy. It’s done!
We started Data Sketches because we felt as if we hadn’t
created enough actual projects in the previous months. NB: Yeah, happy dance!
We felt like having this collaboration and forcing each other
to work on it would be a great way to consistently create new SW: Just hug it, cry, tears, dance around, and then
things—and with a high level of fun woven into it. I did not go on with life.
expect it to become the thing that it became.
Even though this is the end of our Data Sketches “Awesome
SW: Yeah, defnitely. When we started this project, we were Collaboration Marathon,” we intend to keep working on
chatting back and forth on Slack. It’s not even that we were projects that excite us, together or individually. Follow our
like, “Okay, we’re going to do this super serious, big project. latest progress on Twitter and Instagram at @sxywu and
It’s going to be a big deal.” We were actually saying “Hey, @NadiehBremer, and on our websites at shirleywu.studio
do you want to do something together?” We were very casual and VisualCinnamon.com!
425
=== PAGE 427 ===
Acknowledgments
No book (or large-scale project) happens in a vacuum. We want to thank our
loved ones, our friends, and all of the friendly strangers on the Internet that
have supported us through this journey and gotten us to this point.
To Alberto Cairo, for giving us the idea of creating a book and all of the
encouragement, feedback, and mentorship he’s given us; Tamara Munzner,
for never hesitating to champion us, including us in her data visualization book
series, and encouraging us every time we needed that extra push or piece
of advice to keep going.
To our editors Stephanie Morillo and Tianna Mañón, for making sure our
rambles and tangents were turned into beautiful, coherent sentences; Kirsten Barr,
Elliott Morsia, Sunil Nair, and the staf of CRC Press who have guided us throughout
the publishing process.
To the team at Praline who turned our written manuscript and images into this
wonderfully designed book weaving together the images and text in such a way we
were once afraid was impossible.
To Alice Lee, the creator of our gorgeous cover, who had endless patience
and listened to every one of our exceptionally specifc requests.
To the many people who have looked at our works in progress to provide
thoughtful feedback, gave tips to solve particularly gnarly coding problems,
or replied to our Twitter calls for help. In particular, we wouldn’t have reached the
same level of sophistication in our projects without the help of RJ Andrews, Taylor
Baldwin, Tony Chu, Erik Cunningham, Matt Daniels, Matt DesLauriers, Sarah Drasner,
Russell Goldenberg, Ian Johnson, Isaac Kelly, Susie Lu, Elijah Meeks, Philippe Rivière,
and Sam Saccone.
For giving feedback on our fnal manuscript to polish it as much as we could:
Zan Armstrong, Peter Beshai, Mike Brondbjerg, Chen Hui Jing, Jen Christiansen,
Michael K Freeman, Andy Kirk, Maarten Lambrechts, John Burn-Murdoch, Mollie
Pettit, Visnu Pitiyanuvath, Jane Pong, Lisa Charlotte Rost, Sara Sprinkhuizen, Alli
Torban, Jan Willem Tulp, Jim Vallandingham, Jonni Walker, and Amelia Wattenberger.
To Sonja Kuijpers and Nicholas Rougeux for joining us as guests for two
of the topics in the online version of Data Sketches, and experiencing the stress
of creating an elaborate data visualization from scratch with us.
=== PAGE 428 ===
From Nadieh From Shirley
My biggest hug to Ralph, my highschool sweetheart for 16 To Alex, who’s been my boyfriend, fancé, and now
years and counting now, for understanding that my visuals husband through Data Sketches and the creation of this
needed many evenings of sitting behind my laptop and still book, who’s stayed with me and cooked delicious food for
making sure that I remembered to drink, eat, and go to bed me as motivation—even through all of my whining about this
on time. To Snookie, my weird laser-pointer-obsessed cat, book; my (Asian) parents, who really don’t understand my
who has been my cuddle support throughout it all, sleeping career choices but are (silently) proud of me nonetheless;
on her pillow next to me on my desk while I was drawing, and my (Asian-American) sister, who frequently tells me how
working, and writing on each project. proud of me she is to make up for how much our parents
rarely voice it.
And thank you so, so very much, Shirley, for taking me along And, fnally, a huge thank you to Nadieh without whom I don’t
on this amazing journey which I’d never dared to have done think I could have ever fnished this gigantic, monumental,
on my own. ambitious project.
Liefs, Nadieh ʕっ•ᴥ•ʔっ (ﾉ^ヮ^)ﾉ*:·ﾟ✧! ♡ Shirley
The diferent ways Nadieh/Shirley/Bremer/Wu would combine
into one person, as imagined by our friend Susie Lu.