=== PAGE 401 ===
An Ode to Cardcaptor Sakura
CardcaptorSakura.VisualCinnamon.com
FFiigg..1122..1199
The main visual outlining the 50
chapters around the outside and the
characters along the inside circle.
=== PAGE 402 ===
401
FEARLESS
FFiigg..1122..2200
When hovering over a character, such
as Sakura here, the lines reveal in which
chapter they have appeared (while
awake). Sakura is the main character
of the story and is in all chapters.
FFiigg..1122..2211
Hovering over a chapter “pill” in the outer
ring, such as Chapter 50 here, shows all the
characters that appeared in that chapter.
=== PAGE 403 ===
HEIDAN
204
FFiigg..1122..2222
Being Sakura’s best
friend (and classmate
and dress creator
and maker of videos),
Tomoyo also appears in
almost every chapter.
aa bb cc
FFiigg..1122..2233
((aa,,bb && cc))
When hovering over any of the
“relationship lines,” a small annota-
tion provides more detail about it.
=== PAGE 404 ===
403
FEARLESS
FFiigg..1122..2244
A close-up of the outer CMYK dotted circles,
where each cluster of circles gives an idea of the
colors used on the (gorgeous) cover art of each
chapter. Hovering over any cluster will reveal
a line for the characters appearing on the cover
(here just Sakura).
FFiigg..1122..2266
A zoom-in on several CMYK
dotted circles.
FFiigg..1122..2255
The fnal legend using the visual itself
to overlay explanations on what each
of the diferent rings represent.
=== PAGE 405 ===
[No text extracted]
=== PAGE 406 ===
405
One Amongst
Many
SHIRLEY
For the last few years, I’ve been wanting to bring my data visualizations
into the physical world, to express my data-driven stories as immersive
installations that people can walk through, explore, touch, and feel.
I struggled with this dream for years, until I realized why I felt such a mental
block: because I designed and coded primarily in 2D and not 3D, I had
no idea how to even think in the third dimension. As soon as I realized that,
I created Legends with Three.js and WebGL, and it really helped me
understand how to think about space and lighting in the third dimension.
But being able to code in 3D isn’t, by itself, enough to create
a physical installation; I also needed to learn hardware. In the fall
of 2019, I did an Artist-in-Residency at New York University’s Interactive
Telecommunications Program (ITP), a master’s program that is at the
intersection of art and technology. I went to ITP with two major hopes:
to learn more about hardware and to collaborate with talented people
on a physical data installation.
To learn hardware, I audited “Introduction to Fabrication,” where I learned
about power tools and machines and played with the laser cutter, and
“Introduction to Physical Computation,” where I learned about circuits
and sensors and lights and Arduinos. Through those classes (and the
ofce hours I was asked to hold as a resident), I was able to meet my two
collaborators: Christina Dacanay1 with her beautiful illustration style
and bold uses of color, and Tina Rungsawang2 with her architectural
background and keen awareness of space. When I asked them if they
wanted to collaborate with me on a project for ITP's Winter Show, they
immediately agreed.
NOVEMBER
2019
FEARLESS
1 Christina Dacanay: http://www.cdacanay.com
2 Tina Rungsawang: http://tina.pizza
=== PAGE 407 ===
YELRIHS
604
Data
From the very beginning, we agreed that we should focus the project on women
in computing. It’s a topic that I’ve been interested in since I created Legends
with women Nobel Laureates, and Tina and Christina agreed that it would also
be a perfect topic for ITP, with its emphasis on combining code and computation
with art.
I started my data gathering with a Wikipedia article—the same way as Legends.
I was able to fnd a page titled “Women in Computing,” and from there I discovered For my data gathering
the Wikipedia category “Women computer scientists.” I started by scraping the list process, please see
the data section
of women in the “Women computer scientists” category, but after a day of cleaning
of “Myths & Legends”
and exploring the data, I realized that both the data I pulled and the analysis I did where I did almost
exactly the same
were too simplistic to tell me anything interesting. Instead of trying to devise a more
thing. For the
sophisticated analysis (we were quite limited on time), I decided to take a step back analysis, I looked at
and try my hand at another dataset. I had initially avoided scraping the “Women distributions of birth
years and backlinks,
in Computing” article because the women’s names were scattered throughout the
and intersection
paragraphs instead of cleanly in a list, and that would be more work to extract. But of keywords in the
summary—none
once I realized that the data in there was much richer—the paragraphs succinctly
of which produced
described each woman’s accomplishments and even gave an approximate anything noteworthy.
timeframe for most women’s contributions—I knew immediately it would be worth
the trouble.
For this second attempt at scraping the data, I wrote a script to:
1 U se wikijs to access all the links in the “Women in Computing” page,
and flter down to only those that link to other Wikipedia pages.
2 U se Google’s Knowledge Graph Search to determine whether the Wikipedia
page is for a person or thing, and only keep those that the Knowledge Graph
returned as “Person.”
3 F or each person, use wikijs to pull their Wikipedia article summaries, and for
each summary, see if it includes “she/her” or “he/him.” Keep those that have
more mentions of “she/her.”
4 If there were no mentions of either, mark the person for a manual check.
5 Save name, summary, and certainty of gender into a spreadsheet.
Once I had the spreadsheet, I went through each person to double-check their
gender. For each of the remaining 46 women, I wrote a one sentence summary and
found an approximate year for their contributions by reading through the “Women
in Computing” article and cross-referencing their own Wikipedia pages.
Because of the space constraint for the ITP Winter Show, we could only design
an installation with a maximum of 20 women. While gathering and cleaning the data,
I highlighted approximately 30 women that I found particularly inspiring and brilliant.
For the fnal pass, Christina, Tina, and I sat down and narrowed the list down to the
16 women that we found undeniably inspiring. (We achieved “undeniably inspiring”
if all three of us, upon reading her summary, said “wow, she’s so cool, I want to learn
more about her!”—a very scientifc process.)
=== PAGE 408 ===
407
FEARLESS
Sketch
For our very frst brainstorm, we asked ourselves what we’d make if we had This was the most
no restrictions on time, space, or money. We went through many diferent ideas, unique and interesting
sketch section out of
but at the core of all of them was the desire to highlight the invisibility of these
all the Data Sketches
women and raise awareness of their incredible contributions through our projects I’ve done, and
should more accurately
installation. We also wanted to create an experience that would leave people
be called “Prototype.”
feeling inspired, stimulated, and wanting to go through it again. Finally, we wanted
to create something interactive, where people’s interactions with the piece could
potentially alter it and leave something of themselves behind.
For the second brainstorm, we narrowed our ideas down to the more
budget-and time-friendly ones and looked at existing installations for inspiration.
We especially liked Judith G Levy’s “Memory Cloud,”3 where nostalgic photographs
are placed within small souvenir viewers and people are invited to walk through
dozens of these viewers and peek in to see each 35mm slide. We loved the idea
of people interacting with each object and decided to do something similar:
mapping each object to a woman and placing their information inside (Figure 12.1).
We wanted people to take their time reading and learning about each woman,
and I especially loved the motion of looking inside, like looking into a secret world
and learning something precious.
FFiigg..1122..11
Initial notes on the
aesthetic, interaction,
and data mapping
of the installation
From there, the rest of the data mappings came quickly: the women would
be organized in the z-axis by the year of accomplishment, from earliest to most
recent. The y-axis would correlate to the number of their backlinks, so the more
backlinks they had and the more “renowned” they were, the higher up we would
suspended them from the ceiling because they were more “out of reach.” And
for the women with fewer backlinks and less “renown,” we placed them lower
and easier to reach, so that more people could read and learn about them.
3 Judith G Levy, “Memory Cloud”:
https://judithglevy.com/section/421361-Memory-Cloud-1-Indianapolis-Museum-of-Art-an-interactive-installation.html
=== PAGE 409 ===
YELRIHS
804
To encourage people to “leave something behind,” we wanted to include
a “summary board” near the exit with a prompt for participants to place a (gold,
star-shaped ) sticker by women they felt particularly inspired by because of the
installation (Figure 12.2).
When we shared our initial ideas in class, our professor suggested an
interaction where when one object is pulled down, it triggers others to drop down.
This feedback inspired us to group the women so that when a visitor walks up and
reads about one woman, the others in the group would drop down and create
a path, guiding them through the rest of the installation.
FFiigg..1122..22
Initial foor plan with
the “summary board”
placement courtesy
of Tina. We originally
wanted a clear enter
and exit, so that
people would have
a path they could
follow, but we weren’t
able to do this in the
Winter Show with the
space we were given.
With the majority of the idea feshed out, Christina went about sourcing materials,
and Tina and I began work on fguring out how to detect a person interacting with
our objects in the installation. We brainstormed several ideas: a pulley system that
would complete the circuit when pulled, a motor at the top that would unwind the
cord when pulled, a capacitive touch sensor on the object, infrared motion sensors
placed somewhere nearby … all the options felt overly engineered, fnicky,
or sensitive.
When we went to our Fabrication professor’s ofce hours, he suggested
we go simpler. He gave us a vibration sensor (where the circuit completes when
we shake the sensor, Figure 12.3), and a tilt sensor (the circuit completes when
it’s tilted up, Figure 12.4) to experiment with.
FFiigg..1122..33
Vibration sensor, which unfortunately
would only trigger when I ficked it at
full force.
=== PAGE 410 ===
409
FEARLESS
FFiigg..1122..44
Tilt sensor, which
completes the circuit
when tilted above a
certain angle. Slightly
fnicky but fairly reliable.
Unfortunately, the vibration sensor took quite a bit of force to trigger, which meant
that if we used it in our object a person would have to really shake it (instead
of gently picking it up) for us to know that they’d interacted with it. On the other
hand, though the tilt sensor wasn’t perfect—there didn’t seem to be an exact angle
that it started sending “on” signals, and even then those signals were quite noisy—
it was a much better option. We also considered
Through this process, we realized how fnicky and fragile a motor would be, an accelerometer,
which would have more
especially with the thousands of people (many with kids!) coming through the
sophisticated readings
Winter Show and pulling on the cords. Even though we really liked the idea—motion than a tilt sensor but
was 4x more expensive.
is always great for capturing attention—we decided to nix the idea. Instead,
We quickly decided
we agreed to put lights in the objects since changes in light are quite noticeable against it.
and even more importantly, much easier to control.
As soon as we settled on using lights, we knew the perfect way to take
advantage of it: we would start the installation with each of the objects dimmed—
a metaphor that despite their important contributions to computing, these women
are still largely unknown—and as people went through and read about each woman,
their lights would grow brighter and brighter, until by the end of the show, all of their
lights would be brightly lit. This not only gave us a great overarching metaphor,
it also accomplished our goal of having people’s interactions alter the piece itself.
For the lights themselves, we went with Adafruit’s brand of individually
controllable RGB color lights called the Neopixel. We originally went with them
because we wanted to map data to the color of the lights, but quickly decided
against the idea when we realized how hard it was to distinguish most colors from
each other (unless they were very diferent, like between red, blue, and green).
We did end up keeping the Neopixels though, because they gave us better
programming control than most LEDs (and also we’d already spent money
on them (〃￣ω￣〃ゞ).
=== PAGE 411 ===
YELRIHS
014
The hardest part about prototyping and working with these Neopixels was having
to solder them to wires. Because the conductive areas on the Neopixel strips
were so small and close to each other, we ran the risk of the solder touching and
causing short-circuits if we weren’t being careful. Fortunately, a kind ITP student On the bright side,
taught me about soldering paste (Figure 12.5), which makes the solder stick only I eventually learned
how to use
to the conductive part and nowhere else and it was such a magical time-saver. I also
a multimeter to test
learned to use a hot glue gun after soldering to make sure that the wires wouldn’t fall for shorts—but only
after accidentally
of easily. These are precisely the sorts of lessons I went to ITP for. (๑•`ㅂ•´)و✧
short-circuiting
my (and Tina’s) Arduino
boards…
FFiigg..1122..55
Soldering a Neopixel
strip with the help of
soldering paste, which
was life changing.
FFiigg..1122..66
The spray painted orbs,
which unfortunately
did not have a mirror-
like fnish.
At the same time we were fguring out the electrical components for each object,
Christina was sourcing and experimenting with materials. She quickly landed
on using fllable Christmas ornaments, and we went about acquiring one from
a nearby Michael’s to prototype with, while also ordering three dozen from
Amazon at the same time. Christina then went about sanding the nobs of
of each ornament and carefully drilling holes into the center for running the
wires through. To hide the tilt sensor and Neopixel within the orb, we frst tried
to spray paint the interior of the orbs. We had bought refective spray paint that
was supposed to give a mirror-like fnish, but it didn’t turn out well. That was the
night we learned refective spray paint only works on glass and not plastic
(Figure 12.6). (⌒_⌒;)
=== PAGE 412 ===
411
FEARLESS
FFiigg..1122..77 We also took the opportunity to test out two competing ideas we had: we couldn’t
The two options we decide whether we wanted people to peek in through a small hole to read the
considered for how the information, or whether we should leave the orb as is and have a larger area
orb should look.
to read the information from (Figure 12.7). So it was really great to have the spray
painted prototypes, because right away we could tell that the peephole would
be way too small and too much of a struggle for people to read large amounts
of information through.
We also realized that we should place the information placard at a certain
angle so that people would: 1) know that there was a placard inside they needed
to read, and 2) be incentivized to pick it up in the correct direction to trigger the
tilt sensor:
FFiigg..1122..88
Prototype of the
second option with no
peephole and a large
transparent area to
read the information
through.
=== PAGE 413 ===
YELRIHS
214
As the refective spray paint didn’t work out, Christina suggested cellophane
(Christina was an absolute pro when it came to materials). This not only hid the tilt
sensor and neopixel, it also had a beautiful efect when lit up in the dark:
FFiigg..1122..99 It was really fun to prototype the materials. The whole process was so diferent
A quick prototype with from working digitally, where we never have to worry about gathering materials,
cellophane and the that it felt like a fun new challenge. Overall, it took about two weeks for us to settle
information printed on
on all the parts.
vellum, a translucent
paper to help mimic
frosted acrylic and
difuse the light, that
can also be printed on. We had to be strategic about buying just
enough material to test with and ordering
the rest early enough to get them by the
time we had to start production.
I also learned a lot about prototyping with cheap, readily available materials
(like masking tape, cardboard, and tin foil) to mimic the efect and quickly try out
an idea.
=== PAGE 414 ===
413
FEARLESS
Code
Once we had all the physical components fgured out for the orb, I started on the
coding. To control the tilt sensor and Neopixel we settled on, we used the Arduino:
FFiigg..1122..1100
An Arduino Nano on a
breadboard.
Arduino is a brand of microcontrollers, and the way we use it is by wiring the pins
on the Arduino (circled in orange in the photo) to our lights, sensors, motors, etc.
Each of those pins have a corresponding number it is identifed by, and in our code,
we can tell Arduino to read a certain pin as input (usually a sensor) and another
as output to write to and control.
(You never thought you were gonna get a run-down of Arduino from
Data Sketches, did you? Well, we aim to go above and beyond! (๑•`ㅂ•´)و✧)
Because this was my frst full project with Arduino, I started by keeping my
code simple. I used a button as a stand-in for the tilt sensor and an LED in place
of the Neopixel. I used an array to keep track of which pins the buttons were wired
to and another for which pins the LEDs were wired to. I also had an array for keeping
track of which buttons were pressed and another for each LED’s brightness. Every
time the button was pressed it was the equivalent of a “tilt” and I’d increase the
brightness of the LED and save it to the brightness array. I wanted to use the button
and LED (which I was already familiar with how to code) frst so that I could get the
functionality working frst, before having to worry about incorporating the tilt sensor
and Neopixel—both things I hadn’t worked with before.
=== PAGE 415 ===
YELRIHS
414
Once I had the basic functionality, I went about replacing the LED and push button
with the Neopixel and tilt sensor in my code. The Neopixel actually comes with its
own library of functions, but because it assumes that I’m programming a strip We needed to set
of many Neopixels, it took me a long time and a lot of guesswork to setup each up the Neopixels
individually because
orb’s Neopixel individually.
the wiring between
Reading the tilt sensor was a little more straightforward, though I did have each Neopixel was
too long, and the
to adapt an Adafruit example to accomodate for noisy signals. One of the most
electronic signals that
interesting lessons I learned working with hardware is that nothing in the physical carry the instructions
world is clear cut like it is in digital and all sensor readings are noisy. would decay at those
lengths—another
With the Neopixel and tilt sensor code incorporated, the rest of the code from
physical constraint I’d
my frst iteration worked perfectly. have never expected.
With one orb working, I had to make sure it could work both scaled up and with
groups. As a team, we’d decided to group our list of 16 women into four categories:
mathematicians, computer scientists, creatives, and other (executives, inventors,
etc.). If any one orb was interacted with and lit up, the rest of the women in the same
group would also light up in a delayed stagger.
To implement the delayed stagger, I needed to incorporate time into my code.
The only way to do this in Arduino is with mills(), which returns the number
of milliseconds since the Arduino began running. I refactored my code to store the
following information: whether the whole group should be lit up or not, which orb
in the group triggered that change, and at what millisecond that change was
triggered (which I called startTime ). I could then use that information to loop
through each orb in the group, and given the index of the orb that triggered the
change (activeOrb ), calculate each orb’s startTime based on the distance
of that orb from the activeOrb. I would then set the orb’s brightness if the time
was past that orb’s startTime .
FFiigg..1122..1111
Four Neopixel strips
and one orb with
Neopixel and tilt sensor
all frighteningly wired
up for my code testing
purposes.