=== PAGE 101 ===


=== PAGE 102 ===
 
  
 
 
 
 
Four Years of 
Vacations in 
20,000 Colors 
SHIRLEY 
Traveling is one of my absolute favorite activities, and since graduating 
college, I’ve tried to go abroad at least once a year. (I moved around 
a lot as a kid, so I get restless when I’m in the same place for a long period 
of time; traveling helps alleviate that.) Since I take so many pictures when 
I’m traveling, I thought it’d be a really fun idea to gather all the photos I took 
on my trips and visualize them. 
SEPTEMBER 2016 101 TRAVEL 

=== PAGE 103 ===
102 
SHIRLEY
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.3.1
Fig.3.2
Data 
I started by going through all of my photos from the last four years (thank you 
iPhone and Dropbox), and grouped them by year and airport code. I learned two 
things from this exercise: I like going to the same places, and I take a ridiculous 
amount of pictures. On a two-and-a-half week trip to Japan and China in 2016, 
I took more than 1,000 pictures. 
After I sorted through my images, I played with gm, a Node.js wrapper for 
GraphicsMagick (a collection of tools for reading, writing, and manipulating 
images). My frst idea was to reduce the images down to their top three colors, then 
blur and resize them. I experimented with every ffth photo from the ±1,000 images 
I took on my latest trip (because 1,000 is just ridiculous), and displayed them in the 
browser in chronological order to look for any interesting color patterns (Figure 3.1). 
Unfortunately, I didn’t make out anything noteworthy with the colors (it also wasn’t 
very performant and took a few seconds to load). For my second attempt, I decided 
to go through every ffth image from every trip instead of just the most recent. 
I resized the images (Figure 3.2), read the images’ metadata, and saved the dates 
they were taken as well as the latitude/longitude of where they were taken 
(when available). 
This came out to about 800 images, which was just enough to notice some 
lag in loading all the images, but not enough to do anything particularly exciting 
with them. 
As using all the images (±4,000 photos) would be way too memory intensive, 
I decided to analyze the colors instead. I searched around for how to get an image’s 
primary color(s), and found get-image-colors, a Node.js package that returns 
an array of the most frequently appearing colors in a given image. Unfortunately 
at this point, I did something minorly stupid; I passed in the fully-sized images 
(2,500x3,200 pixels and approximately 3MB each) to get the primary image colors. 
Admittedly, the amount 
has increased as I’ve 
gotten newer phones 
with more storage, 
which might also be 
interesting to analyze. 
Fig.3.1
 Every ffth image 
from my latest trip and 
their top three colors, 
blurred and resized. 
Fig.3.2 
Every ffth image, 
resized. 


=== PAGE 104 ===
103 
TRAVEL
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
Fig.3.3
Around 30 minutes and 120 images later, I realized that I could have just passed 
in my resized images (13KB) to get the colors instead, which would’ve been so much 
faster. D’OH! 
Once I fgured that out and fxed the code to take in the resized images, the 
package worked wonderfully; it returned more than 4,000 colors for all 800 images 
in a matter of seconds: 
Fig.3.3 
The top fve colors for 
each of the 800 images 
Sketch 
When I started brainstorming ways to visualize the data, I immediately thought 
of food (my travels are always dictated by food). I remembered the ice cream I ate 
in Japan the month before, and thought how cool (so punny!) it would be to make 
an ice cream image out of all my photos. 
I started looking for inspiration on The Noun Project, a searchable website 
dedicated to icons, and found a super cute set of ice cream and beverage icons 
to base my design on. 

=== PAGE 105 ===
104 
SHIRLEY
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.3.4
Fig.3.5
I decided to have each trip’s visualization be in the shape of a food from that 
location or region (Figure 3.4). I’d place each color along the icon path, with the 
x-axis being time of day the photo was taken and the y-axis being the nth day of the 
trip. The food would be sized according to the number of photos that trip had, and 
I would apply the “gooey efect” in SVG to blend the colors together. Finally, I would 
clip the colors with the icon so that they would have clean edges. 
I was really excited about this idea, but given the time crunch I decided 
to explore another idea instead. 
The second idea came when I was driving out of a parking lot after dinner. 
I saw a string of lights along a building which reminded me of autumn and the holiday 
season. I thought it would be so pretty to visualize the colors as a string of lights 
or stars in the night sky (Figure 3.5). 
The plan was to place the colors in a scatterplot, with the year the photo was 
taken on the y-axis and the time of day or the location on the x -axis. Then, I wanted 
to use the d3.forceSimulation() layout to get rid of overlap and use motion 
blur in both directions to give a glow efect. Finally, I wanted to run a string through 
all the lights/colors from the same trip. 
I decided to try out this idea of lights in the sky, but when I plugged my data into 
it, it didn’t turn out as I expected (Figure 3.6). 
Fig.3.4 
Idea with food and 
beverage icons 
Fig.3.5 
Idea with lights in the 
night sky 
The gooey efect 
is achieved in SVG 
by applying a blur 
flter and upping the 
contrast, so that 
shapes look like 
they stick and blend 
together like gooeys. 
It’s interesting looking 
back on it now how 
my sketch/design 
process has changed; 
when I did this project 
three years ago, 
I concentrated a lot 
on how to technically 
implement the 
design, whereas 
now, I concentrate 
a lot on the end user 
experience, on creating 
good visual metaphors, 
and bringing end 
users delight. 


=== PAGE 106 ===
105 
TRAVEL
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
Fig.3.6Fig.3.6 
I call this piece “Man 
Peeing into Puddle.” 
(*≧艸≦)
This is essentially what happens when I sketch before actually exploring the data. 
For “Movies,” I had the time to explore my data before really sketching and deciding 
on my idea, and with “Olympics,” I just happened to luck out with the data and the 
idea I went with. So I got complacent for this project (and plus, I had already done 
so much work to get the data to where it is) and convinced myself that this idea will 
work! It obviously did not. Important lesson learned: always explore the data frst. 
Exploring Data: List Attributes 
Because I don’t have a data background, I’ve had to learn on the job, and over the 
years I’ve developed some guidelines for myself. 
The frst step of this guideline (after I’ve gathered and cleaned the data), 
is to always identify the “lowest” unit of data and list out its relevant attributes. 
When I list the attributes, I also like to note if it’s quantitative, categorical, ordinal, 
temporal, or spatial; this really helps me when I’m designing and thinking through what 
visual channels might be appropriate. For this project, I gathered my vacation photos 
and extracted the top colors per photo. Therefore, the “lowest” unit was the individual 
colors, and the attributes were the RGB and HSL for the color (quantitative), the time 
the photo was taken (temporal), and the trip that it was taken on (categorical). 
Once I have the attributes listed, I highlight the ones I think are interesting and use 
those to formulate questions and hypotheses. Then, I plug the data into a charting library 
to test my hypotheses, explore, and get a better understanding. 
For more detail, refer 
to the lessons “Explore 
Data: Ask Questions” 
on page 304 of my 
“Culture” chapter, and 
“Explore Data: Use 
Charting Libraries” 
on page 336 of my 
“Community” chapter 

=== PAGE 107 ===
106 
SHIRLEY
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.3.7
Code 
Around the time I was going to start coding, the short list for Kantar’s “Information 
Is Beautiful” Awards1 had been released and I came across Nicholas Rougeux’s 
absolutely gorgeous “Of the Staf” project 2 (Figure 3.7). 
It inspired me to try out a radial format, something I never worked with before. 
So I grouped the colors by trip and positioned them in a grid (Figure 3.8, left), 
then used the time and day the photo was taken as the angle of the colors around 
the center (Figure 3.8, right). 
I used trigonometry to convert each color’s designated angle (the time 
that photo was taken) into x- and y-positions. After I found the correct positions, 
I used the new D3.jsforce module to actually place the colors. In particular, 
I used d3.forceX() and d3.forceY() to nudge the colors toward the x - and 
y-positions I had previously calculated, and then d3.forceCollide() to specify 
a radius for each node within where other nodes cannot enter (thus getting rid 
of overlap but making sure the colors are as close to each other as possible). 
Now that I had the colors sorted by time, I could see that on some trips I 
took photos consistently and almost daily, while on others, photos (and thus the 
colors) were bunched into a few days with none in between. But I wanted to see 
if I could get more out of the data. In particular, I wondered if I could sort color to 
map to a visual channel. After some research, I found the blog post,“The incredibly 
challenging task of sorting colours” by Alan Zucconi.
3 It went into incredible detail 
about the diferent ways of sorting, but for me the section on HSV (hue, saturation, 
value) sorting sounded the most promising, and I decided to map the hue to the 
radius (Figure 3.9). 
The force layout 
is a graph layout 
algorithm that 
calculates the 
positions of nodes 
in a graph. It does 
this by making sure 
that nodes repel each 
other so as not to 
overlap, while also 
placing nodes that 
are connected closer 
together (but not 
overlapping) 
Fig.3.7
 Nicholas’s gorgeous 
“Of the Staf” project 
1 Kantar “Information Is Beautiful” Awards: https:/ /www.informationisbeautifulawards.com 
2 Nicholas Rougeux, “Of the Staf”: https:/ /www.c82.net/ofthestaf/ 
3 Alan Zucconi, “The incredibly challenging task of sorting colours”: http:/ /www.alanzucconi.com/2015/09/30/colour-sorting/ 

=== PAGE 108 ===
107 
TRAVEL
Fig.3.8
Fig.3.9
Fig.3.8 
Going radial. 
Fig.3.9 
Sorting by hue. 


=== PAGE 109 ===
108 
SHIRLEY
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.3.10Fig.3.10 
Switching the 
encoding of time 
and hue 
From this, I started to see patterns of which days and which trips had which colors. 
Unsurprisingly, I had loads of green and blue from my pictures of scenery; I love 
taking photos of nature, of oceans and mountains and lakes and forests. But I didn’t 
know what the reds and oranges were until I looked into the underlying photos … 
and found that they were mostly food photos! 
At one point, I also tried to switch the encoding of mapping time to angle and 
hue to radius (Figure 3.10, left) to the other way around (Figure 3.10, right). I found 
it really beautiful, but it looked too much like Nicholas’s “Of the Staf” project, and 
it was also harder to read. I wanted to focus on what kind of photos I took across 
the days, but mapping time to radius meant that the frst day of any trip was much 
smaller in circumference than the last day, and that was very inaccurate. It was 
a good experiment to switch and see what it looked like (and it was an easy, two line 
switch) but I ultimately decided to go back to my original encoding. 
All of the code until this point only took a day. It took three more days to gather 
additional metadata on my trips (where I stayed, what I enjoyed, who I traveled with 
and visited), fgure out the annotations for that metadata (Figure 3.11), and w ork 
through the interactions on how to show that information. 
When people say that 80% of the work 
for a dataviz is in the annotations, they’re 
really not kidding! 
My 2016 trip to New 
York and 2014 trip 
to Japan have so many 
reds and oranges
(￣一￣;.

=== PAGE 110 ===
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
Trigonometry 
When I was in high school, I distinctly remember thinking to myself: when would I ever 
use trig in real life? I had my answer seven years later, when I created my frst data 
visualization. 
I use trig functions all the time now, especially when calculating radial layouts. I’ll map 
the angle and radius to attributes in my data (in this project, I mapped angle to the time 
the photo was taken and radius to the hue of the color) and get the corresponding 
x- and y-positions: 
x = radius * Math.cos(angle) // make sure angle is in radians 
y = radius * Math.sin(angle) 
And I can use the resulting x /y to position my marks. 
If I want to go the other way—perhaps I have the x /y of a mark, and I’m trying to get 
the angle of its rotation—I will use Math.atan2 : 
angle = Math.atan2(y, x) // make sure to pass in y first! 
A word of caution with Math.atan2: because it only returns values between -π to π , 
if you want a number between 0 and 2π , it will require additional calculations after. 
Finally, the distance formula is just super all-purpose useful: 
dist = Math.sqrt(Math.pow(x2 - x1, 2) + Math.pow(y2 - y2, 2)) 
These are just the formulas I use most often. There are, of course, many other use cases 
worth brushing up on trigonometry for. 
✧( ◌ ु •⌄• ) 
For an explanation 
of marks, see the 
“Marks & Channels” 
lesson on page 47 of 
my “Movies” chapter. 
A nice trick to 
remember that 
y comes frst when 
using atan2 : tangent 
is opposite (y) over 
adjacent (x). 

=== PAGE 111 ===
110 
SHIRLEY
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
Fig.3.11Fig.3.11 
The fnal annotations. 
In particular, the interactive elements were hard to get down; originally, hovering 
over a line or a dot would show the information for that particular element. But since 
the lines and dots were all so small and thin, the ficker was unbearable whenever 
I accidentally unhovered or tried to move to the next line. After many iterations, 
I landed on something I really liked: placing the hover over a whole day (instead 
of the lines and dots within that day) would display all the information—where I was, 
who I was with, if I enjoyed my time—from that day. 
Reflections 
I’m really happy with how this project turned out, especially with how much 
I learned about color and trigonometry and the opportunity to try out a layout 
I haven’t before. I am also happy that I pushed through with the annotations and 
legend portion and got them to a point that I could be satisfed with, since that’s 
what I usually despise working on (discipline!). 
This project is one of my favorite personal projects, because of how much 
I learned about myself (and how I like to travel) from it. It’s also been a great way 
to commemorate and recall some of my favorite memories with my favorite people. 
( •⌄• ◌ ू )✧ 

=== PAGE 112 ===
111 
TRAVEL

=== PAGE 113 ===
 
 
 
Fig.3.12 
Fig.3.13 
Four Years of Vacations in 20,000 Colors 
shirleywu.studio/projects/travel 
Fig.3.12 
The fnal visualization with legends, 
annotations, fourteen trips, and 20,000 
colors. My favorite is defnitely the 2014 
trip to Japan and China, I made so many 
great memories. 
ଘ(੭ˊѡˋ)੭✧ 
Fig.3.13 
Hovering over 
a particular day shows 
detailed information 
from that day. I used 
a d3.arc() generator 
to create the pie slice 
shape used to highlight 
that day; it’s still one of 
my favorite interactions. 

=== PAGE 114 ===
113 
TRAVEL


=== PAGE 115 ===
114 
PRESIDENT 
&ROY 

=== PAGE 116 ===
115 
DENTS 
YALS RO

=== PAGE 117 ===


=== PAGE 118 ===
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
Royal 
Constellations 
NADIEH 
Talk about timing. Our original project idea was going to be around the 
US elections, but with the way that turned out, we decided to look for 
something diferent. As a European, focusing on American presidents 
didn’t interest me much, but I felt that the European royal families would 
be a good equivalent to how Americans might see the presidential families. 
The frst thing that came to mind when I thought about the royals was 
their bloodlines. Due to all of the intermarriages in the past, I was sure 
most royals in Europe were related. The question then was: how close 
of a relative? Were they all cousins twice removed, or perhaps even 
closer than that? 
OCTOBER 2016 117 PRESIDENTS & ROYALS 

=== PAGE 119 ===
118 
NADIEH
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
a b
Fig.4.1 
(a & b)
Data 
As with other projects, I thought that such a popular topic would yield many nice 
datasets with information about the royal bloodlines, but the reality was much 
diferent. Sure, many people had drawn the family trees of various royal families, 
but was there a dataset that ofered a connected look at all of Europe’s royals? 
Luckily, I found a fle online
1 that seems to be the information source of royal 
genealogy. It contains genealogical information of 3,000 individuals, all somehow 
connected to royalty in Europe! 
(ﾉ◕ヮ◕)ﾉ*:·ﾟ✧ 
a b 
Fig.4.1 
(a & b) 
The left side shows 
how individuals are 
described in the 
original data. The 
right side shows a 
data snippet of how 
these individuals are 
related through family 
connections. 
However, it was created in 1992 and therefore missed the recent additions to the 
royal families. And although the fle contained lots of people related to royalty, the 
list wasn’t complete. I therefore spent some time checking connections to famous 
people and added (grand)parents or (grand)children if needed. In the end, 
I manually added ±150 people to the fle. 
Family trees are a perfect match for a visualization type known as a network 
or graph that reveals interconnections between a set of entities. Therefore, the odd 
format of the original data had to be transformed into a “nodes” and “links” fle. 
A nodes dataset contains one row per entity—a person in this case—with a person’s 
characteristics in diferent columns, such as name, title, and date of birth. There’s 
also a unique ID to be able to reference this person in the links fle. 
1 www.daml.org/2001/01/gedcom/royal92.ged 

=== PAGE 120 ===
119 
PRESIDENTS & ROYALS
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
A links fle shows how these people are connected, with each row representing 
a connection between two people (from the nodes fle). You can also add more 
attributes to these rows, such as the type of connection (e.g. “parent-child,” 
“wife-husband”). 
At the beginning, all I did was get the nodes and links fles in a usable shape. 
But while wrangling my way through the “force layout,” which is what you use in 
D3.js to create a network visual, I thought about new variables to add or values 
to pre-calculate to get more insights from the structure of this gigantic family tree. 
Another addition came in the form of trying to fll in missing information. The original 
fle has several characteristics for individuals: a unique ID, the name, their royal 
title, birth date, and death date (and location). Birth dates especially seemed like 
a wonderful way to create some more structure in the network, but these weren’t 
known for everybody in the dataset. Thankfully I didn’t need an exact date; I just 
needed a date that was in the right half of the century. 
I wrote a small script in R that estimated birth dates either by looking if the 
death date of a person was known and then subtracting 60 years, or by looking 
at the birth or death date of the spouse, children, or parents, in that order, and again 
subtracting or adding some years to account for generational diferences. This gave 
me an estimate for 95% of the people with unknown birth dates and I eventually 
fltered the remaining people out when I only kept the people born after 1000 AD. 
My fnal addition to the data was to calculate which of the 10 royal hereditary 
families each person was most closely related to and within how many steps. I used 
this in the fnal network to make each individual want to be, horizontally, near their 
closest royal family connection. 
This will probably 
make more sense 
once you’ve read the 
fnal parts of the next 
section and see the 
fnal visual. 
Sketch & Code 
In my initial sketches, I couldn’t go beyond drawing some abstract circles connected 
by lines; I didn’t actually know what kind of network the data would give me. I frst 
needed to know the insights that were hidden in the “shape” of the data and thus 
had to visualize the network frst before I could think about the more broader design. 
Instead of sketching with pen and paper, 
I sketched with code 
The frst challenge was just getting something visible on the screen. Being new 
to the updated force layout in D3.js, and not fully understanding all of its settings, 
I found basic examples on the site “Block Builder” which helped me visualize circles 
and lines. 

=== PAGE 121 ===
120 
NADIEH
 
Fig.4.2 Fig.4.3
Fig.4.2 
09:40 The frst 
successful result on my 
screen, a collection of 
circles and lines that 
were quickly expanding 
and moving out of my 
screen. 
Fig.4.3 
09:53 Slightly updating 
the network settings 
left me with a “hairball.” 
Fig.4.4Fig.4.4 
10:08 Making the 
canvas 36× bigger 
in size fnally created 
enough space for the 
network to reveal some 
structure. 


=== PAGE 122 ===
121 
PRESIDENTS & ROYALS
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
Fig.4.5
However, they just kept on expanding outward right outside of my screen 
(Figure 4.2), which wasn’t very helpful… 
Adjusting some settings of the network so the circles wouldn’t keep excessively 
pushing themselves away gave me an even more useless “hairball” as a result 
(Figure 4.3). What the network really needed was some space. I therefore converted 
back to my initial settings and zoomed the page out very far on my browser 
so it would ft a square of 6,000 pixels wide, instead of the 1,000 pixels I had before. 
Everything became very tiny, but some structure started to appear (Figure 4.4). 
Some time and many iterations later I managed to squish it into a square of “only” 
3,500 pixels.Even with some structure visible, I quickly came to the conclusion that 
I really needed more context to fnd insights. As mentioned before, I felt that birth 
year would be the most interesting variable that brings sense to the connections 
in this network; chronology is quite inherent to a family tree. I therefore colored 
the nodes by year of birth from dark blue for people born the longest time ago, 
all the way to yellow for the youngest person. 
Fig.4.5 
11:42 Coloring 
everybody by birth 
year (when known). 
The underlying algorithm that is used in D3.jst o create these networks is based 
on the idea of gravity and charges. The circles try to push away from other circles, 
but the lines between them work a little like (elastic) strings making sure connected 
circles don’t move away from each other (too far). In short, it has its roots in actual 
physics. But thankfully, in a computer environment we can “mess” with the laws 
f nature and play with how “gravity” works. 
A network is called a 
“hairball” when it looks 
like a circular clump 
showing no structure. 
It’s pretty much 
the worst possible 
outcome. 
At this point I was still 
relying only on those 
individuals with known 
birth dates. People with 
missing dates remained 
grey. 

=== PAGE 123 ===
122 
NADIEH
Fig.4.7
Fig.4.6Fig.4.6 
12:50 Pulling the 
network apart by 
year of birth, but the 
40% of individuals 
with unknown birth 
dates represented as 
grey circles are pulled 
towards the center. 
Fig.4.7 
15:51 After estimating 
a birth year for the 
people with unknown 
years of birth the 
network was fnally 
truly “pulled apart” 
chronologically.. 

=== PAGE 124 ===
123 
PRESIDENTS & ROYALS
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
Fig.4.8Fig.4.8 
Fixing the 10 current 
royal hereditary 
leaders, the big circles, 
along a vertical line 
started to pull 
apart the separate 
family trees. 
The change that had the biggest impact on the structure came when I started using 
the year that an individual was born to defne which horizontal position that person’s 
circle would be placed in the visual. 
Although I’ve since fallen in love with this technique of applying a data 
variable to the gravitational pull, it has one major caveat: you can’t have unknown 
data for the variable that you use. Just like you can’t place a circle in a scatterplot 
if you don’t know the value for both the x- and y-axis, you need to know where each 
circle needs to be pulled. (And my dataset didn’t have birth data for about 40% 
of the people.) That didn’t stop me from frst trying the most straightforward “fx” 
to at least get a sense of the result: everybody with unknown birth dates would be 
pulled towards the center. It created the rather odd looking shape from Figure 4.6, 
which I felt showed enough potential to investigate further. 
That’s when I decided that I had to estimate a birth year for all the unknowns. 
A few hours later, I was looking at a network that was organized in a way that’s 
normal for a family tree: chronologically, from left to right in this case (Figure 4.7). 
And although I frst thought that I had gotten to the point where I could get 
some insights, when I truly started looking for info, the network was still rather 
uninsightful; it didn’t tell me anything about recent royal history, or what has led 
to there now being only 10 royal families in Europe these days. Having spent more 
than six hours on this in one sitting (what are weekends for otherwise…) I stopped 
to try again the next day. 
To get my mind of the network structure itself I started thinking more about 
the general design. As an astronomer, many things remind me of the night sky and 
network visuals often look like constellations to me. I therefore switched to a deep 
dark blue background and made the circles look like little stars by adding a touch 
of yellow glow. 
Now that I was more pleased with the aesthetic look, I remembered the initial 
question that I wanted the visual to convey: how intermarried and interconnected 
were all of the royal families? To answer this, I knew that I needed to make 
distinctions between the diferent “branches” of the current royal families and 
see how intertwined they remained and/or became. 
First, I made the current royal hereditary leaders big and noticeable. Then 
I spread them out evenly along the vertical axis, which would hopefully pull apart the 
network, placing closely related royal leaders near each other and the most loosely 
connected monarchs on the outside (Figure 4.8 ). 
I explained how 
I estimated the birth 
dates in the “Data” 
section. 


=== PAGE 125 ===
124 
NADIEH
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
Fig.4.9Fig.4.9 
Pulling the family trees 
more apart by making 
each individual be 
slightly pulled towards 
their closest current 
relative that’s at the 
head of a royal family. 
Continuing on the idea of connections and focusing on the current monarchs, 
I calculated the “distance” of each person to a current monarch, in other words, 
how many hops did it take to go from that person, through family connections, 
to each royal. I used that number to set the circles’ opacity. Individuals closest 
to a royal would be very visible, diminishing to almost completely transparent for 
those more than six steps away from all of the royal leaders. And that’s when 
I fnally started to see some potential! 
To separate the network even more into the current family trees I used the 
“shortest distance to a royal” in another way as well: By generating a slight pull 
of the individuals to their closest current royal descendant. And also (non-linearly) 
squishing the date scale the farther back in time it goes. This makes the visual more 
focused on the (most interesting) last two centuries. 
The entire network is 
connected; each and 
every person is related 
to everybody else. 
A vertical pull in the 
previous landscape 
style screenshots, and 
a horizontal pull in the 
newer portrait-style 
version. 
And that’s when I ended up with a network structure that I was happy with. It now 
revealed insights into how connected the current monarchs are. For example, the 
Monaco line (all the way on the right side of Figure 4.9) separated from the rest 
of Europe more than 200 years ago—the most recent connection to the rest of the 
network happens at around 1800—but Denmark, England, Norway, and Sweden, 
which are closer in relation, are all in the center. 
Next up, I wanted to investigate how to use interactivity to make the closest 
connection between two people more apparent. After some brainstorming 
I came up with two main things to achieve: frst, to show how far “six degrees 
of separation” spread from a hovered-over person into the network. The second 
thing was to show the shortest path between any two people. 
This genealogy seems 
mostly focused on the 
English bloodline the 
farther back it goes. 
In this case I mean 
that as six generations 
backwards and forward 
in time. 

=== PAGE 126 ===
125 
PRESIDENTS & ROYALS
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Design with Code 
Unlike more general graphic design, the efectiveness of a data visualization 
design really stands or falls with the data that goes into it. You can have an amazing 
looking pixel perfect design based on dummy data, but when the actual data behaves 
in an unexpected way, you’ll have to restart your design process. That’s why I prefer 
to only sketch out the rough abstract shape that I want to ft my data into, and then 
move towards making the idea into a reality by using the actual data. If that idea 
doesn’t work with my data I can easily sketch out some other rough idea and try 
it again. 
Afterwards I continue to design with code, where I test out other aspects 
of a typical design, such as details, colors, fonts, and efects, by programming it. 
That way I can see the efect of, say, a diferent color palette appearing on all of the 
data after just one refresh of my page. 
Although you can assess pretty well how a chart would look if your dataset only 
has a dozen or so datapoints, the more data that you need to visualize, the faster you 
need to go from design to working with the actual, and total, dataset! 
I typically start out with very simple and typically slow code, which makes it quick 
for me to determine if I’m happy with the visual result. Only when I saw that the “six 
degrees of separation” hover showed interesting aspects across diferent people, 
did I implement a faster method. 
Due to the overall “space” theme, I decided to scale the colors that appear 
on a hover to the temperature scale of actual stars. 
Fig.4.10Fig.4.10 
Hovering over 
Sissi shows which 
other people she’s 
connected to within 
six generations; 
including three current 
monarchs. 

=== PAGE 127 ===
126 
NADIEH
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
Fig.4.11Fig.4.11 
The visual 
representation 
of the shortest path 
between two clicked 
people. A solid line 
is a connection by 
blood, a dotted line 
represents a marriage 
connection. 
At frst I was afraid that with almost 3,000 circles in the network that a “shortest 
path calculation” would take too much time. I nevertheless frst wanted to make 
it actually work and then see if it was something to keep and optimize. After a short 
search I found a script on GitHub
2 I adjusted to my needs. Surprisingly enough 
it performed amazingly well, returning a shortest path before I could blink! Adding 
some transitions to fade out the other circles and highlight the shortest path, 
and I was done much faster than expected. 
I’m quite happy with the 
small dotted rings that 
rotate around the two 
selected people. It’s the 
small victories. 
Finally, to add a little bit more of a hierarchy and visual appeal to the visual, 
I highlighted several “interesting” royals throughout history, from Henry VIII to Marie 
Antoinette to the last monarchs of several European countries that are no longer 
a monarchy. A quick introduction and legend at the top, and I was done with 
my “Royal Constellations.” 
Fig.4.12Fig.4.12 
Several famous royals 
from the past are 
highlighted as well. 

=== PAGE 128 ===
127 
PRESIDENTS & ROYALS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reflections 
I completed this project in just two weeks due to an upcoming vacation. With more 
time, I would’ve added other things, like a search box where you could fnd any royal 
in the visual by name. But I’m happy with what I managed in two weeks. While the 
interactive experience could have been improved upon, it accomplishes exactly 
what I wanted: to show how interconnected the European royal families really are. 
Plus, I learned a heck of a lot more about creating network charts with D3.js! 
A year later, I fnally felt comfortable enough with canvas that I rebuilt and 
replaced the entire visual in canvas instead of SVG, making it a lot faster. 
2 ShortestPathCalculator script by @julianbrowne: 
https:/ /github.com/julianbrowne/dijkstra/blob/master/javascripts/ShortestPathCalculator.js 

=== PAGE 129 ===
 
Royal Constellations 
RoyalConstellations.VisualCinnamon.com 
Fig.4.13Fig.4.13 
The fnal result of 
“Royal Constellations.” 

=== PAGE 130 ===
129 
PRESIDENTS & ROYALS


=== PAGE 131 ===
130 
NADIEH
 
 
 
Fig.4.14
Fig.4.15
Fig.4.14 
The shortest path between Queen Elizabeth II of the UK and 
Elizabeth of Bavaria (also known as Sissi), Empress of Austria and 
Queen of Hungary in the 1800s, is a bit of a distant one. However, 
all connections except one are blood relations: the other 
is a husband-wife connection between a previous king 
of Belgium (Leopold III) and princess of Sweden (Astrid). 
Fig.4.15 
Hovering over Louis XIV of France, also known as the Sun King. 
With 72 years, he has been the longest reigning monarch 
in European history. 

=== PAGE 132 ===
131 
PRESIDENTS & ROYALS
 
 
Fig.4.17
Fig.4.16
Fig.4.17 
Hovering over Queen Margrethe II of Denmark, 
the big blue circle in the top/middle-left. 
Fig.4.16 
Hovering over Queen Elizabeth II shows one 
connection within six steps to another monarch: 
King Harald V of Norway, seen as the red large 
circle to the left of Elizabeth’s blue large circle. 
He is Queen Elizabeth’s closest relative who 
is also a monarch, and they are second cousins. 
(As a side note, Queen Margrethe II of Denmark, 
King Juan Carlos of Spain and King Carl XVI Gustaf 
of Sweden aren’t much farther away: they are her 
third cousins.) 

=== PAGE 133 ===


=== PAGE 134 ===
133
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
Putting Emojis 
on the 
President’s Face 
SHIRLEY 
Originally, Nadieh and I slotted October for the US presidential elections, 
in order to have something ready by Election Day. But as October 
approached, I realized more and more that I wanted absolutely nothing 
to do with the 2016 election (other than to vote). We mused on what 
to do instead, and I realized: a future president getting voted in also 
means a current president leaving the White House. 
While we might not all agree on what the Obama administration did 
or didn’t do politically, I think most of us can agree that the Obamas 
are one cool couple. I thought of them as the slightly dorky parents 
that I wouldn’t mind associating with if they were my friends’ parents. 
Like that time when Mr. President recorded a video of himself talking 
to a mirror so that he could plug healthcare.gov, or when Madame First 
Lady Carpool Karaoke’d with James Corden and she was so hilariously 
relatable. This made me realize that I would, in some way, miss them 
being our POTUS and FLOTUS. 
OCTOBER 2016 PRESIDENTS & ROYALS 

=== PAGE 135 ===
134 
SHIRLEY
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
    
   
 
   
  
 
   
 
 
Data 
I wanted to do something silly and light-hearted to commemorate the Obama’s eight 
years in ofce. And the frst thing I could think of was all of their appearances on 
late-night talk shows I watched on YouTube (that “Slow Jam the News with President 
Obama” was so good). I started digging around to see if there was a list of talk show 
appearances for both Barack and Michelle—and it was IMDb to the rescue again! 
Both of them had their own IMDb pages, so I cross-referenced Barack Obama’s 214 
credits and Michelle Obama’s 123 with a Wikipedia article of late-night American 
network TV programs. I was able to narrow down the credits to 24 late-night 
appearances for Barack and 22 for Michelle. I then compiled a list with the date 
of their appearance, name of the late-night talk show, and the show’s YouTube 
channel if available. 
Using that information, I was able to use the YouTube Search API to search 
for keyword “obama” and flter the results down by channelId and a publish date 
within fve days of the interview date. Unfortunately, because I wasn’t sure how 
many videos were published for each interview (if at all), I set the maxResults 
to 15. This meant that I would get back videos within those days that had nothing 
to do with the Obamas, and I had to manually go through all of the videos to weed 
out the irrelevant ones (there were 244 videos, and 186 were ultimately fltered out, 
leaving only 58). 
The list was unfortunately incomplete, as there were interviews with past shows 
and hosts like the Late Show with David Letterman and the Tonight Show with Jay 
Leno that weren’t on YouTube. I chose to keep them out instead of trying to fnd 
the videos on other websites or on unofcial channels, in the hopes that this would 
make for cleaner and more consistent data. 
Around that time, I attended the annual D3.js unconference. I told 
some friends there about the dataset I had gathered and how I wasn’t sure what 
to do with it. They were enthusiastic: “You should get the captions for each video 
and do something with the words!”; “Wouldn’t it be cool if you could run facial 
detection on the video and correlate their emotions with what they’re saying?” 
And even though I was quite worried about how long it would take me, the idea 
took root in my mind. 
After some research, I realized there wasn’t a fnancially afordable way for me 
to pass whole videos into any facial recognition software, but thankfully I was still 
surrounded by some very resourceful friends at the conference. They suggested 
an alternative: take screenshots of the video and upload the images to Google 
Cloud Vision API for analysis. Here’s what I did (and the Node.js packages I used): 
1. I took the list of all videos, and downloaded them (and their captions, 
if available) with youtube-dl. 
2. I used vtt-to-json to convert the captions into JSON and got the 
timestamp every time someone talked, and used that timestamp to 
screenshot the video with fluent-ffmpeg. 
3. For each screenshot, I uploaded it to Google Cloud Vision API, which gave 
back data of any faces it found in the image, the x/y bounds of the face, 
and any emotions detected on the face. 
4. I saved the videos’ captions into one JSON fle. 
5. I joined the captions with the annotated image data (including emotions) 
from the Google Cloud Vision API. 
I actually didn’t realize 
until I published it and 
someone pointed it 
out: I included The Ellen 
DeGeneres Show but 
that’s a daytime TV 
show! The errors that 
happen in our data 
gathering. (￣ー￣； 
The sort-of annual 
d3.unconf started out 
in San Francisco and 
is an event very dear 
to my heart. 
Thank you Ian Johnson 
and Erik Cunningham! 

=== PAGE 136 ===
135 
PRESIDENTS & ROYALS
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
This entire process took a few days, and once I fnally had all the data cleaned 
I started thinking about the design. I learned my lesson from “Travel,” and made sure 
to explore the basic shape of the data, as well as all the diferent types of data I had 
on hand before starting to sketch. 
Fig.4.1Fig.4.1 
List of the data I had. 
Data Can Be Found in Many 
Diferent Ways 
When I start on a data visualization project, I always start with a curiosity, a topic 
I’m interested in—whether that’s the Obamas’ late-night talk show appearances, 
recurring themes in Hamilton the musical, Dance Dance Revolution, or summer 
blockbusters. I fnd that having that curiosity keeps me motivated and gives 
me direction when looking for datasets. 
Once I have a curiosity, I start with a Google search. Sometimes I’m lucky, 
and I fnd a dataset that’s already downloadable in JSON or CSV format (very rare). 
Oftentimes, I’ll fnd a website where the data is in plain text on the page; in those 
instances, I can get the data with their API or by scraping the site. For scraping, I like 
using Node.js modules (mostly http to programmatically request the webpage), 
and for APIs, I’ve found that there’s usually a corresponding Node.js package that 
does all the hard parts (like OAuth authentication for signing into a service) for me. 
If I can’t piece the data together from resources online, then I have to manually 
gather and enter the dataset. It’s tedious work, but I’ve learned (the hard way) that 
Excel makes the process so much easier. One time, I found the data I wanted in image 
form, and was able to get the underlying raw data by just … asking the person who ran 
the website. It was amazing. 
For a short explanation 
of JSON and CSV, 
see “Technologies & 
Tools” at the beginning 
of the book. 
Whenever I think, 
“Somebody must have 
done this already” while 
coding, somebody 
usually has! 
You can read about 
this story in my “Music” 
chapter. (*≧▽≦) 

=== PAGE 137 ===
136 
SHIRLEY
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Sketch 
Once I had the metadata listed, I started thinking about what I wanted to convey. 
I knew it was ambitious, but I wanted to make full use of such a rich dataset and also 
get across why even though there were 44 appearances I only had screenshots 
for 29 videos. I’d also been wanting to try my hand at “scrollytelling” to test my 
technical skills and decided to create a multi-section project. I mapped out 
“Scrollytelling” 
is a popularmy frst few sections to introduce the dataset by show and hos t (Figure 4.2, ①) technique where 
and then by date (Figure 4.2, ②). I would display all the videos I had (Figure 4.2, ③), we tie progression 
highlight the videos with captions (Figure 4.2, ④), and for the videos with captions, of the story and 
its corresponding
plot the emotions detected throughout the video on a timeline (Figure 4.2, ⑤). visualizations 
And even though I was still blurry on the latter half of the sections, I decided to user scroll. 
to take a few days to build out those initial sections frst. This helped me get a better 
feel of the video data, which I hadn’t explored in as much detail as the hosts and 
appearances data. 
I’m glad I did that because I originally envisioned something where all the 
videos would be lined up in rows, and a timeline would show a bar graph of both 
word frequency based on the captions and all the times that POTUS and FLOTUS 
laughed. But after working on the initial sections, I realized that that was way too 
much data to try and show on one screen. I came up with another sequence 
of sections to introduce the videos instead and decided to only show the selected 
video’s timeline of captions and laughs (Figure 4.3). 
Fig.4.2Fig.4.2 
Sketch of the frst few 
sections. 

=== PAGE 138 ===
137 
PRESIDENTS & ROYALS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.4.3Fig.4.3 
Revised sketch to 
introduce the videos 
and the emotions I 
detected in them. 
Code 
As soon as I fgured out that the Google Cloud Vision API gave me the x /y bounds 
of faces and heads, I knew I had to put emojis on their faces (unfortunately I couldn’t 
include these screenshots for copyright reasons, but please make sure to visit the 
fnished projec t online
1 to see them instead). 
And boy, do I not regret it at all; it brought me so much joy. The rest of the 
visualization was basically just a build up to the end tool for exploring all the photos 
with emojis on their faces. 
Silliness aside, this project’s implementation actually brought me quite a few 
frst-time technical challenges: 
• Animation based on scroll 
• Cropping SVG images 
• Horizontal fsheye to expand hovered images 
• Fitting all the visualizations in mobile
 ( ⚆ _ ⚆ ) 
• Making scrubbing the fsheye smooth on mobile ( ╬ಠ益ಠ)
1 Shirley Wu, “Putting Emojis on the President’s Face”: http:/ / shirleywu.studio/projects/obamas 

=== PAGE 139 ===
138 
SHIRLEY
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.4.4
Fig.4.5
And because I was just trying to get it all done, I didn’t take many screenshots 
of my progress (which I do regret). But I did spend quite a bit of time fnding 
headshots of the Obamas and cutting just their faces out to use as icons 
throughout the visualization 
(Figure 4.4).ヾ(０∀０*★)ﾟ* 
The frst thing I wanted to do was to implement animation tied to scrolling 
like Tony Chu’s and Stephanie Yee's “ A Visual Introduction to Machine Learning”2 
(an incredible piece of scrollytelling where all the animations are tied to scroll), 
because it always seemed like a fun technical challenge. I was able to work out 
the logic with the help of Tony’s “Small Scroll-linked Animation Demo”
3: The key 
is to leave a subset of the section static, where scrolling results in no movement 
in the visualization (so that the reader can actually read the text), and then tie 
scrolling through the rest of the section with animating the visualization from 
that frst section to the ne xt (Figure 4.5). 
For example, in the top two sections, each headshot of the Obamas 
represented a late-night TV show appearance. In the frst section, I grouped 
the appearances by the show host and laid the headshots out in a grid under the 
show host’s headshots (Figure 4.6, top). For the second section, I arranged their 
appearances along a timeline of their eight years in ofce and linked them to the 
corresponding show host (Figure 4.7, bottom). 
There are a lot of 
explainers out there 
now on how to do 
scrollytelling, but I 
really found Tony’s 
helpful when I was 
getting started. 
It’s really important 
to make sure not to 
move too many things 
at once. You don’t 
want to have text 
moving at the same 
time the visualization 
is animating. Too much 
movement makes 
people unsure where 
to concentrate on and 
might even make them 
nauseous. 
Fig.4.4 
Headshots of the 
Obamas that I spent 
a long time cutting out 
with Photoshop. 
Fig.4.5 
Logic for scroll-based 
animation. 
2 Tony Chu and Stephanie Yee, “ A Visual Introduction to Machine Learning”: http:/ /www.r2d3.us/visual-intro-to-machine-learning-part-1/ 
3 Tony Chu, “Small Scroll-linked Animation Demo”: http:/ /bl.ocks.org/tonyhschu/raw/af64df46f7b5b760fc1db1260dd6ec6a/ 

=== PAGE 140 ===
139 
PRESIDENTS & ROYALS
 
  
 
 
Fig.4.6Fig.4.6 
First two sections with 
annotations of where 
scroll does or does not 
trigger animations. 
I passed the Obamas’ and show hosts’ positions in the frst section as starting points 
into d3.interpolate() , and the positions in the second section as the ending 
points. I then passed the amount scrolled between the sections into the interpolator 
to get the correct in-between x/y positions for the Obamas and show hosts and 
animate them down the screen. I repeated this for every pair of sections. 

=== PAGE 141 ===
140 
SHIRLEY
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Fig.4.7
Fig.4.8
Fig.4.7 
For section two, 
hovering a host 
shows corresponding 
guest appearances. 
It was a very simple 
implementation, but 
it made me really happy 
because it helped a lot 
in making the tangle of 
links easier to navigate. 
Fig.4.8 
In section four, 
hovering on a caption 
within a video shows 
the emotions that 
were detected for 
that caption. 
In the third section, I introduced the videos I downloaded from YouTube, with the 
x-axis using the same timeline as the previous section (I love this little detail) and 
the y-axis being the number of views. In the fourth section, I fltered down to just 
the videos with captions; the flled circle radius is the number of views, and the 
outer ring radius is the duration of the video. It’s fun to see that some of the videos 
got a lot of views despite being shorter in duration, or vice versa. The small dots 
on the ring represented the times when Google Cloud Vision API said there were 
expressions of joy, so we can see whether the laughter was present throughout the 
video, or if it was concentrated in specifc block s (Figure 4.8). My favorite part about 
this was actually in the description, where I calculated the number of times the 
POTUS and FLOTUS laughed and found out that the FLOTUS had signifcantly 
more laughter! 
I like the intent behind 
the dots and outer 
ring, but it’s defnitely 
some of my more 
experimental work— 
I’m not sure if I’ll do the 
same thing now, since 
it is quite overwhelming 
and confusing. 
For the fnal section (that I spent the whole project building up to), my goal was 
to create an interface that would encourage exploration of the emoji-flled photos. 
It centers around a timeline of the captions and emotions detected in the selected 
video, and hovering the timeline shows the full screenshot for that scene with emojis 
placed on any detected faces. 

=== PAGE 142 ===
 
 
 
  
    
 
    
    
 
  
     
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How Scrollytelling Works 
I use scrollytelling when I want to explain diferent parts of the data or break down interesting 
visual insights step-by-step to a more general audience. It’s great because I can control exactly 
how the reader interacts with the visualization, and all the reader has to do is scroll. 
Scrollytelling is when a user scrolls past a series of “containers” on the page—usually 
divs—and each container triggers a change in the visualization. At the bare minimum, 
there are four things that scrollytelling has to do: 
1. Add event listener for scroll. I also usually use lodash.js’s debounce to make sure that 
the callback function isn’t called more than once every 64–200ms, depending on how 
computationally heavy the visualization update is. 
2. Within the scroll callback function, calculate which container we’re in given the scroll 
position and each container’s top and bottom y-positions. 
3. Trigger corresponding changes to the visualization. If there are animations and those 
animations are tied to scroll (the animation progress is directly mapped to the scroll 
progress, rather than automatically started upon entering the container), calculate 
the diference between the scroll position and the top of that container. 
4. Divide the diference by the height of the container, and pass that decimal value 
to the interpolator. 
I implemented my frst scrollytelling project from scratch because I wanted to understand 
how it worked, but I’ve since relied on JavaScript libraries to help me manage the scrolling. 
My current favorite is Scrollama.js from The Pudding, because of its super straightforward 
API and focus on performance; I highly recommend it. (And let’s face it, scrollytelling isn’t 
something you ever want to implement twice!) 
A callback function 
is a common type 
of function used in web 
development that is run 
(“called back”) when 
some other action— 
in this case, scroll— 
has occurred. 
For how animations 
and interpolators work, 
see the lesson “Custom 
Animations” on page 
269 of my “Nature” 
chapter. 
Scrollama.js aims 
to be more performant 
by ofoading the 
computations in step 
2 (which can get 
expensive if done 
on every scroll) to the 
Intersection Observer 
API, which can detect 
when an element enters 
the viewport—I’m such 
a fan! 

=== PAGE 143 ===
142 
SHIRLEY
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.4.9
As soon as I implemented the timeline, I knew I needed to implement the fsheye 
efect—a way for users to hover and expand specifc slices to better preview them. 
I had seen the New York Times implementation of the horizontal fsheye for 
navigating through fashion week images
4, and I knew Nadieh had adjusted that 
code for canvas before. It took a bit of digging to fnd an SVG equivalent for 
cropping centered images (use preserveAspectRatio and set the viewBox 
width the same as the image width), and a few passes through Nadieh’s and the 
original fsheye code to get the subset I needed (mapping an x -coordinate 
to its new position based on the distortion) to get it working in my own code. 
I found my SVG image 
cropping solution 
on Sara Soueidan’s 
blog
5; she has the best 
explainers. (ﾉ≧∀≦)ﾉ
Fig.4.9 
The timeline as-is (top) 
and the timeline with 
the fsheye efect on 
hover (bottom). 
One of the fnal things I had to do was make sure that all the visualizations worked 
in mobile. It was the frst time I really tried to be mobile friendly, and after some 
research, I ended up using ismobilejs, a JavaScript package that detects what 
device the user is on (and I’ve used this package in all my projects ever since). If the 
package detected the user was coming from mobile, I passed in a narrower width 
for all my visualizations, resulting in very squished visualizations (but they did ft 
the screen!). My happiest mobile moment, though, was getting that fsheye efect 
working in mobile. When Iinitially used the browser’s built-in touchmove event 
listener, scrubbing was extremely buggy and fnicky. After spending an entire day 
thinking of a diferent interaction I could make with the timeline on mobile, I realized 
that D3.jsalr eady had a great touch implementation with the drag module; the end 
result was so smooth it was magical butter. 
For examples on 
designing visualizations 
specifcally for mobile, 
see Nadieh’s “Dataviz 
For Mobile And 
Desktop Isn’t Always 
About Scaling” lesson 
on page 290 of her 
“Culture” chapter. 
4 Front Row to Fashion Week, February 2014: http:/ /www.nytimes.com/newsgraphics/2014/02/14/fashion-week-editors-picks/index.html 
5 https:/ /www.sarasoueidan.com/blog/svg-coordinate-systems/ 

=== PAGE 144 ===
143 
PRESIDENTS & ROYALS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Reflections 
This project took much longer than all my previous Data Sketches projects, but I’m 
so happy with myself for overcoming all the technical challenges I faced and fgured 
out. I’m especially happy that I implemented scrollytelling from scratch because 
I now know exactly how it all works and use that knowledge regularly in my work. 
One of the best things, though, is that it gave me a sense of technical fearlessness, 
where I really felt that if there was something I wanted to implement, that I’d be able 
to fgure out how to do it, given enough time and the right Google searches. 
Sadly, the response to this project was less enthusiastic than I was hoping for, 
considering the amount of efort I put into animating the visuals and the overall 
amount of time I ended up spending. I think this was because my text merely recited 
the facts in the data—which wasn’t very memorable for anyone. (This was in contrast 
to my “Book” project about Hamilton the musical, where I really focused on what 
I learned in my analysis and wrote an article that really made the Hamilton fans feel 
for the musical; that was much more successful.) 
But that in turn also taught me a great lesson; how I feel about my own projects 
shouldn’t be dictated by external validation, but rather how much fun I had building 
it. And I’m really proud of everything I was able to accomplish; I think it really set me 
up well technically for all my subsequent projects. I like my silly, fun, Obamas project 
very much.
 ｡ﾟ✶ฺ.ヽ(*^∀^*)ﾉ.✶ฺﾟ｡

=== PAGE 145 ===
 
Putting Emojis on the President’s Face 
shirleywu.studio/projects/obamas 


=== PAGE 146 ===
145 
PRESIDENTS & ROYALS
Fig.4.10Fig.4.10 
Scroll-based 
animation from frst 
section to the next. 


=== PAGE 147 ===
146 
SHIRLEY


=== PAGE 148 ===
147 
PRESIDENTS & ROYALS


=== PAGE 149 ===
148 
BOOK 

=== PAGE 150 ===
149 
BOOKS 