=== PAGE 301 ===
300 
SHIRLEY
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Fig.9.3
Fig.9.4
Fig.9.3 
Bar chart showing 
search interest for 
Brazil across the years, 
as well as a map for 
the countries that 
searched for Brazil in 
2016. 
Fig.9.4 
Pie charts above 
the centroid of each 
country showing 
search interest across 
the years. 
To show a breakdown for each year, I thought of placing pie charts above 
the centroid (or geometric center) of each country, with the size representing the 
amount of search interest and the colors representing years (Figure 9.4). The pie 
charts showed me that some countries have been searching for destinations 
in Brazil since 2004, but others only started searching recently. This was interesting, 
but potentially misleading; we couldn’t tell from our data if those countries only 
recently became interested in traveling to Brazil, or if they only started using Google 
recently. Alberto—who was responsible for our art direction—also advised 
me against putting pie charts on maps to avoid confusing readers. 
So, I went back to the drawing board and began my frst attempt at 
categorizing the topics (Charles did the more sophisticated version later on). 
I wondered if instead of focusing on just one country at a time, I could show all the 
countries and their topics from the get-go. I represented each topic as an arc and 
arranged it in a circle around the country it belonged to, colored it by its category, 
and positioned it clockwise by the year it was searched for (Figure 9.5 ). This version 
was certainly pretty, and it was interesting to see which countries were most 
popular for travel-related topics, but it was also hard to understand. It wasn’t easy 
to compare years that weren’t next to each other or see if certain categories went 
up or down over time. Alberto urged me to try a normal bar chart instead. 
I’ve since learned that 
I have to be careful 
with circles as it’s hard 
to judge relative sizes 
with them, and that pie 
charts should really 
only be used for a few 
values that are part of 
a whole. Datawrapper, 
a charting tool for data 
journalists, has a great 
article about this on 
their website.
1 
1 Datawrapper, “What to Consider When Creating a Pie Chart”: 
https:/ /academy.datawrapper.de/article/127-what-to-consider-when-creating-a-pie-chart 

=== PAGE 302 ===
301 
CUL TURE
Fig.9.5Fig.9.5 
Topics are arranged 
in a circle around 
the country they 
belong to, colored by 
their categories, and 
positioned clockwise 
by the year they were 
searched for. 


=== PAGE 303 ===
302 
SHIRLEY
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
Fig.9.6
For the bar chart, I decided to represent the topics as blocks, mapped the year 
to the x-axis, and kept the category as color. I also decided to add another 
dimension and mapped the search interest (the popularity) of a topic to the 
width. This was an unfortunate mistake, I call this piece “The Plunger”: 
Fig.9.6 
“The Plunger,” 2017. 
Each block represents 
a topic, with the 
x-axis being the year, 
the color being the 
category, and the 
width being the search 
interest. 
But I did like the idea of trying to show the popularity of a topic. So in my next 
attempt, I swapped out the blocks with circles and added another dimension 
to it: each circle represented one “source” country searching for that topic, and 
the radius that country’s interest in that topic. This meant that the more overlapping 
circles there were, the more “source” countries searched for that topic in the 
“target” country, indicating more international interest (Figure 9.7). 
I liked this version the most and decided to expand on it. As I now had 
a concept of “source” countries per topic, I wanted a way to see which “source” 
countries were searching for that topic and whether they were geographically 
close to the “target” country. I added an interaction where clicking on a particular 
topic would show the “source” countries' proximity to the “target” country along 
the y-axis, and the years searched along the x -axis. But I didn’t like how some 
of the countries in Europe overlapped with each other (Figure 9.8, middle), 
so I tried a heatmap for my next attempt (Figure 9.8 right). 
I liked the heatmap enough, so I went on to draft a story around the most 
searched topic that would also introduce the visualizations. But after digging 
through the two visualizations for interesting insights and banging my head 
on the desk for an entire afternoon, I had to face the hard truth: I needed 
to rethink my visualizations. Even though I found them visually interesting, 
they weren’t actually easy to do any analysis with. 
So I went back to brainstorming and asked myself what I wanted to learn 
about the data. I remembered, in my previous dig through the data, the seasonal 
nature of some of these topics’ search interests, and wondered if there was 
something there—were certain countries and continents searched for more 
in summer as opposed to winter or vice versa? 

=== PAGE 304 ===
303 
CUL TURE
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.9.7
Fig.9.8
Fig.9.7 
Each circle is a 
“source” country 
that searched for 
a particular topic, 
and the circles overlap 
for the same topic. 
Fig.9.8 
Notes on what should be shown when a topic is expanded 
(top right), frst attempt at showing the “source” countries that 
searched for the selected topic arranged vertically by proximity 
to “target” country and horizontally by year searched with 
search interest mapped to radius of circle (bottom right), 
and second attempt with a heatmap with search interest 
mapped to color opacity instead (bottom left). 

=== PAGE 305 ===
304 
SHIRLEY
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
Exploring Data: Ask Questions 
I’ve found that when I mark certain data attributes as interesting, I naturally come 
up with corresponding questions to explore. I’ve also found that having a set 
of questions and hypotheses really helps me keep focused and prevents me from 
getting distracted by interesting tangents, especially in huge datasets. It’s great 
to note those interesting tangents for later though, so that I can go back to them 
when all of my hypotheses are proven incorrect or I can’t fnd anything interesting 
with my questions. 
With my “Culture” project, I did all of my data exploration by coding my 
visualizations from scratch, but I’ve since learned to use charting libraries instead. 
(Efciency!) 
To visualize topics by continent and season, I decided to fip things around. Instead 
of focusing on travel topics searched for in a “target” country, I visualized search 
topics by season. Here, the top row represents topics searched for in the spring, 
and the bottom is summer (Figure 9.9). Each block represents a travel topic people 
in the United States have searched for, and each topic is grouped by the continent 
they belong to. The continents are ordered by their geographic proximity to the 
United States. 
And yet again, the visual didn’t go the way I was hoping for; it turned out that 
people search for the exact same topics across all the seasons, so the visualizations 
for both spring and summer looked almost exactly the same. I was so bummed that 
I left the cafe I was working from, but on my drive home I realized that even if the 
topics are exactly the same, their search interests may not be. As soon as I got 
home, I (very excitedly) set the height of each block by their search interest and 
fnally, fnally, I had the results that I was searching for: I could see that people in the 
United States searched for travel the most in the spring (presumably planning their 
summer getaways), and the least in the fall (Figure 9.10). I rearranged the blocks 
such that they were grouped frst by season, and then by their continent. This made 
the visualization much more compact, and the seasonal trends stood out even more. 
Now that I had a good summary of the topics, I wanted to create a detailed 
view for each of them. In particular, I wanted to know about the rise and fall of 
each topic’s search interest from 2004 until 2016. My idea was to have the x-axis 
represent the search interest with values out of 100 and each circle represent a 
given year. An arc above the x-axis meant that searches increased across a year, 
whereas an arc below indicated a decrease across a year (Figure 9.11). I learned 
quite a bit from this visual; for example, a lot of topics actually peaked in 2004 and 
have declined ever since, with a lot of them dipping the most between 2008 and 
2011—the years of the global recession. But as much as I liked the visualization and 
as interesting as those insights were, I had to admit that it took a lot of efort to get 
those insights from the visualization. 
For more on starting 
data exploration, see 
the lesson “Exploring 
Data: List Attributes” 
on page 105 of my 
“Travel” chapter. 
For the next step in 
data exploration, see 
the lesson “Explore 
Data: Use Charting 
Libraries” on page 336 
of my “Community” 
chapter. 

=== PAGE 306 ===
305 
CUL TURE
 
Fig.9.9Fig.9.9 
Travel topics grouped 
by continent, colored 
by category of topic, 
and organized 
by season. 
Fig.9.10Fig.9.10 
Travel topics with their 
heights set to search 
interest and grouped 
by season. 

=== PAGE 307 ===
306 
SHIRLEY
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
Fig.9.11 
Fig.9.11 
Sketches of the detailed topic view, and an image 
of it implemented. The x-axis represents search 
interest out of 100, and each circle represents 
a given year. An arc above the axis means the 
search interest increased across the year, and 
arc below means that it decreased. 
Design With Code 
When I frst started Data Sketches, I tried to sketch out two or three diferent ideas 
per project before getting to the code. But I soon found that that was only really viable 
for smaller, more straightforward datasets (like the dataset for my flm fowers project). 
For most of my other projects—especially the ones with larger datasets—I had to get 
my data onto the screen frst, explore it, and use what I learned to inform my design. 
I’ve found this to be particularly important when doing a multi-part narrative, where 
I code section by section. As what I write and visualize in one section can infuence 
the following section, I have to fnish the frst section before sketching the next. 
Nowadays, I mostly sketch to help me work out kinks in the design or remember 
particular details I want to include in the layout or user interactions (often informed 
by the code that came before it). 
Because I was feeling quite stuck on the detail view, I decided to put it aside and 
switched gears to work on the story. Around that same time, I took a Web Animation 
Workshop with Sarah Drasner and Val Head, where I learned the basics of how 
to animate with the gsap (Greensock Animation Platform). With that 
knowledge, I wanted to create “scenes” that explained each visualization in detail, 
and my frst pass used scrollytelling (Figure 9.12). But once I fnished implemen ting 
the frst iteration, I felt dissatisfed with how much vertical space it took to show 
simple concepts like topics and categories (Figure 9.13). 
I’ve found that if I’ve 
been banging my head 
for a while, it’s often 
more helpful to give it 
some space and work 
on something else. 
When I get back to it a 
few days or weeks later, 
I’m always full of fresh 
inspiration. 

=== PAGE 308 ===
307 
CUL TURE
 
Fig.9.12
Fig.9.13
Fig.9.12 
Plans for the story that 
would introduce the 
dataset and explain 
how to read the 
visualizations. 
Fig.9.13 
First iteration of the 
scroll-based introduction. 
Unfortunately it took too 
much vertical space, and 
I decided to scrap it. 

=== PAGE 309 ===
308 
SHIRLEY
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Fig.9.14
Fig.9.15
Fig.9.14 
Search interest across 
time for a selected 
topic and where those 
searches are coming 
from. In the fnal 
iteration, I animate 
both visualizations 
across time. 
Fig.9.15 
Similar seasonal dips 
in searches for Qin 
Shi Huang and his 
Terracotta Army. 
Despite spending quite a bit of time on the story, I still felt unhappy with it. 
I switched back to the detail view and asked myself what I wanted to explore 
and learn from a certain topic. Ultimately, I decided I wanted to see: 
1.  Search interest across the years 
2.  Where those searches were originating from 
With those goals in mind, I went with Alberto’s suggestion of a line chart to show 
search interest across time and a world map to show the “source” countries 
(Figure 9.14). I drew circles on top of each “source” country, sized the circles based 
on search interest, and animated both visualizations across time. 
And because line charts and maps are straightforward, familiar charts, they 
were easy to analyze; I was able to explore and fnd an interesting story about 
the similarity in searches for Qin Shi Huang (the frst emperor of China) and his 
Terracotta Army with them (Figure 9.15). 


=== PAGE 310 ===
309 
CUL TURE
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Fig.9.16 
Fig.9.17 
Fig.9.16 
Final outline to 
introduce the concept 
of search topics and 
their categories, 
where those searches 
came from, and the 
seasonality of those 
searches. 
Fig.9.17 
Using steppers 
to introduce search 
topics and their 
categories (left) and 
where those searches 
came from (right). 
With my stories fgured out, I was able to concentrate on introducing each of the 
visualizations and stories in a space-efcient way. I remembered the discussion 
between scrollytelling and steppers—a technique where instead of scrolling, the 
user clicks to step through sections of a story—and decided to give it a try. The 
steppers were great for saving space, as all the visualizations were contained in one 
place without needing to scroll, but making the user click through each step seemed 
too much to ask. So I decided to animate each step with Greensock to auto-
play through all the steps, and included an interaction where clicking a step would 
trigger the visualization to replay from there (Figure 9.17). That way, the reader would 
still be in control of the animation pacing between each step.
2 
(a) (b) 
The scrollytelling 
versus steppers debate 
exploded within the 
data visualization 
community in the 
summer of 2016, 
and our friend Zan 
Armstrong wrote 
a great article 
summarizing the 
points called “Why 
choose? Scrollytelling 
& Steppers.”
2 
2 Zan Armstrong, “Why choose? Scrollytelling & Steppers”: 
https:/ /medium.com/@zanarmstrong/why-choose-scrollytelling-steppers-155a59dd97fe 

=== PAGE 311 ===
310 
SHIRLEY
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
As always, the little details (not to mention all the writing) took much more time than 
I expected, but I’m really proud of two small touches in particular: the animations 
that automatically start only when the visualization comes into view, and the little 
paper airplanes that my friend illustrated for me. I like to think that it’s all these small, 
subtle details that show readers how much we care about their experience. 
Reflections 
This project is, to this day, one of the hardest I’ve ever completed. The amount 
of back-and-forth I had with my designs led to a lot of self-doubt. But I also learned 
a lot from this process, especially about the areas I needed to improve: 
1. Streamlining the data analysis process: I lose a lot of time forming 
hypotheses and coding custom, often time-intensive visualizations from 
scratch to test them. I’ve been iterating on my process since. 
2. Developing my information design knowledge: I have a lot of ad-hoc 
knowledge I’ve collected through the years, and I’ve since self-studied 
so I could have a more formalized and systematic way of approaching 
design problems. 
This was also the frst time I began 
to realize the importance of prioritizing 
the reader and their understanding 
of my visualizations, instead of just 
doing whatever was visually fashy 
and technically interesting. 
I really took this to heart every time Alberto suggested a more straightforward 
alternative to my fashier and harder-to-read designs (though I do still believe 
that creativity and freedom of expression is important). 
From a technical perspective, I’m really happy that I got to experiment 
and work with Greensock for the frst time. Its concept of adding animations 
to a timeline really makes managing more complex, scene-based animations 
so much easier and I’ve used it in almost every project since. I’m also proud 
of the experience I was able to build, where visitors can interact with it at the 
level they’re most comfortable with, whether it is skimming through the story 
or deep diving into the exploratory tool to fnd their own stories. 
And fnally, I’m really grateful for this project which, along with my Hamilton 
project and Data Sketches as a whole, cemented my freelance career. Before this 
point, most prospective clients weren’t willing to pay the rate I asked for. But after 
I put Google on my resume, I was never questioned again—and I even increased 
my rate right after! 

=== PAGE 312 ===
311 
CUL TURE

=== PAGE 313 ===
 
Explore Adventure 
explore-adventure.com 


=== PAGE 314 ===
313 
CUL TURE
Fig.9.18 
Fig.9.18 
The fnal visual story. 

=== PAGE 315 ===
314 
SHIRLEY
Fig.9.19 
Fig.9.19 
Animation explaining search 
topics and their categories. 
Fig.9.20Fig.9.20 
My favorite visual bug from 
this project. 

=== PAGE 316 ===
315 
CUL TUREFig.9.21 
Fig.9.22 
Fig.9.21 
An expanded topic. 
Fig.9.22 
Animation explaining how the search topics are 
arranged geographically, and that each topic’s 
height is mapped to its search interest. 

=== PAGE 317 ===
316 
COMMUN 

=== PAGE 318 ===
317 
MUNITY 

=== PAGE 319 ===
[No text extracted]

=== PAGE 320 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Breathing 
Earth 
NADIEH 
One random morning I was reading the World Wildlife Fund’s (WWF) 
magazine, which I receive for being a donor. Suddenly I realized that I would 
really want to make a visualization that related to something the WWF 
might do. I pitched the idea to Shirley and we went back and forth a bit 
on what general topic would work for both of us. And when Shirley found 
her angle, the data visualization survey that had just come out, we had our 
topic: “Community.” 
APRIL – MAY 2017 319 COMMUNITY 

=== PAGE 321 ===
320 
NADIEH
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Fig.10.1
Data 
In early April, I asked Twitter for help with fnding datasets that one might associate 
with the WWF and, thankfully, received a bunch of links and advice. However, due 
to being in the United States almost the entire month, I didn’t get to do anything with 
the links until I was about to take a fight home to Amsterdam on April 26th. 
I received a lot of tracking data links related to either animals or water buoys. 
But I noticed that the search functionalities of these data repositories were aimed 
at researchers. I could search datasets based on the ID of a paper or scientist’s 
name. But I couldn’t request all tracking data of, say, whales. Another type of dataset 
that was very prevalent were choropleths, which are flled regions on a map, often 
representing things such as protected areas or animal habitats. 
I started to meander through the links, and I don’t know how I got there, but 
at some point I found myself on the website of NOAA STAR,
1 the Center for Satellite 
Applications and Research. I was randomly clicking around on their website when 
I came across an image of the Earth, colored by vegetation health. 
Fig.10.1 
NOAA STAR map 
showing vegetation 
health for week 23 
of 2016. Credit by 
the NOAA / NESDIS 
Center for Satellite 
Applications and 
Research. 
STAR calls it “No noise (smoothed) Normalized Diference Vegetation Index (SMN)” 
or “Greenness” for short. This is what STAR says about the data: “[Greenness] can 
be used to estimate the start and senescence of vegetation, start of the growing 
season, phenological phases.” 
1 NOAA STAR website: https:/ /www.star.nesdis.noaa.gov/smcd/emb/vci/VH/index.php 

=== PAGE 322 ===
321 
COMMUNITY
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.10.2
There was a map like the one in Figure 10.1 for every week in the year. Plus, there 
was also an option that turned a full year’s data into a very rough animation, 
which was basically an automated slideshow through all 52 maps. Even though 
the animation was crude, and the color palette not optimal, I really liked seeing 
the changes of vegetation health throughout the year. I knew I wanted to visualize 
the same thing—a continuously “Breathing Earth”—but do it in my own style. I was 
very happy to see that STAR shared the data behind the images. However, I had 
never worked with these levels of sophisticated geodata before: the data was 
formatted as hdf and GeoTif fles. Thankfully, I had just seen a presentation on GDAL 
(the Geospatial Data Abstraction Library) at OpenVisConf while I was in Boston. 
According to a Google search, GDAL should be able to open these kinds of fles. 
However, instead of trying to parse the fles in the command line, which the original 
talk was about, I took to Google again to see if there was an R package instead. 
And of course there was: the appropriately named rgdal. 
After getting rgdal to work, I spent the next few hours trying to understand 
how to read in a GeoTif fle, what it contained, how I could play with it, and fnally, 
how I could map it. 
My frst goal was to recreate one of the images from the STAR website 
to ensure that I understood the steps of handling the data. It took about 6-8 hours 
to complete, but even with the sub-optimal color palette, I think the image in Figure 
10.2 is just amazingly detailed. 
This was a great start but these images were approximately 22 million pixels/data 
points per week! There was no way I could load that amount of data into the browser 
52 times. So I recreated them in lower resolution (sadly). I ran some tests and 
eventually reduced the resolution to about 50,000 (non-water representing) pixels 
which looked like a good middle ground. That was small enough for the browser 
to handle, but high enough to still see interesting details. Finally, I made a few 
adjustments to the data setup in order to decrease the fle size for one week’s data 
to 250kB. 
(๑•̀ㅂ•́)ง✧ 
I also fgured out 
how to switch map 
projections, although 
I decided to stick to 
the projection used by 
NOAA STAR. 
Fig.10.2 
Recreated map from 
Figure 10.1 using R in 
even higher resolution. 

=== PAGE 323 ===
322 
NADIEH
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
Sketch 
Sketching was super short this time as my idea was very simple. I wanted to turn the 
pixel-based data about vegetation health into thousands of circles which animated 
through the 52 weeks of data, giving the impression the circles were “pulsating.” 
The circles would grow bigger and darker when the vegetation was healthiest and 
would appear smaller and more yellow-green for low values of “greenness.” Apart 
from the circles, no other types of mapping “markers” (such as country borders) 
would be used. Our Earth is beautiful in itself. 
The more design-based aspects, such as the color gradient, sizes, etc., 
would be created once I had all of the data on my screen. I actually didn’t really 
sketch at all, but just flled two pages in my small notebook with thoughts outlining 
the basics of the design and ideas on how to make the fnal datasets as small 
as possible. 
Fig.10.3Fig.10.3 
Writing down ideas 
on how to create 
small fles and how to 
animate the circles. 

=== PAGE 324 ===
323 
COMMUNITY
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
Fig.10.5
Code 
I started out getting the data on the screen with canvas. I knew that the standard 
D3.jsuse o f SVGs was going to fail here with so many circles (and especially 
having them animated). Thankfully, drawing with canvas is actually quite easy 
and straightforward, especially when only plotting circles at certain locations. 
Figure Figure 10.4, found on the next page, shows some of the steps in the process: 
frst, placing similarly sized and colored circles in the right location, but with 
difering opacity based on “greenness;” next, adding a color gradient to the values, 
adding a multiply color blend mode, and fnally, making the circle size depend 
on greenness also. 
I made a simple interval function that would switch between the 52 maps, 
quickly testing it by drawing a new week’s map as fast as it could. That took about 
2-3 seconds per map; not exactly a “frame rate” that I could use for natural 
looking animations. 
ಥ_ಥ 
Therefore, I dove into Pixi.js, which is a 2D renderer using WebGL. 
And it doesn’t get any faster than WebGL (on the web) as far as I know. I opened 
up a whole bunch of examples, especially those that I could fnd on Bl.ock Builder, 
that combined D3.jswith Pixi. Sparing you the coding details, it sufces to say 
that Pixi was surprisingly easy to pick up. Unexpectedly, however, Pixi was slow… 
Unable to fnd a solution to make Pixi perform faster for my specifc case, 
I asked Twitter and received replies with ideas and even some sandbox examples! 
Some solutions suggested using regl or Three.js, but I also got some interesting 
ideas for Pixi itself. For example, I learned faster performance with Pixi was 
possible with something called “sprites.” You can think of this as small images. 
A popular example of sprites shows how to make hundreds of thousands of the 
same bunny image bounce around. For my case, I used a small white circle for 
my image (or sprite) and then applied a specifc color and opacity to it for each 
of the 50,000 locations. But when I looked at them more closely, I noticed the 
circles weren’t perfectly circular, especially the smaller ones, and they looked 
rather pixelated (see Figure 10.5). Bummer! (
 ≧Д≦) 
Color blend modes 
determine how two 
layers/images are 
blended with each 
other, with multiply 
resulting in a nice 
darkening of the 
overlapping colors 
For a short explanation 
of WebGL, please see 
“Technology & Tools” 
at the beginning 
of the book. 
Fig.10.5 
Somewhat pixelated circles 
with Pixi sprites. 

=== PAGE 325 ===
324 
NADIEH
Fig.10.4 (a,b,c)
a
b
Fig.10.4 (a,b,c) 
Building up the map of 
greenness in canvas. 
a 
b 
(c) 
cc 

=== PAGE 326 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
   
  
 
The Extensive Applications 
of D3.js’s Functions 
The magic of D3.js isn’t only in connecting data to (SVG) elements that will appear on the 
page; it’s also in all the data preparation functions that it ofers. For example, even when 
the fnal visual is made with canvas, I still always use D3.js to create my scales. Going from 
whatever values are in the data to pixel values on my screen (e.g., locations or size), and I use 
the wide variety of color interpolations to create color scales. D3.js also has several functions 
that perform mathematical operations, such as fnding the minimum, maximum, range, standard 
deviation, mean, and more that can save you from having to load an extra mathematical library. 
I also use chroma.js when I need even more specialized control over my colors. 
To illustrate a more advanced example, I would use D3.js just for the power of its 
d3.delaunay()  function which gives me a simpler way to handle interactions on canvas, 
and for its d3.stratify()  functionality to turn my data into a hierarchical nested 
variable, which I can use to create hierarchical, tree-like, visuals. 
In summary, if you work with D3.js, I advise you to explore the wide variety 
of functions that are available through D3.js to speed up the data visualization process 
and do more advanced things. 

=== PAGE 327 ===
326 
NADIEH
(c) (d)
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
a b
c d
Fig.10.6 
(a,b,c,d)
That’s when I decided to give regl a try, which helps to simplify programming with 
WebGL. Also at OpenVisConf, I saw an inspiring presentation about regl featuring 
bouncing rainbow bunnies. And when I found a blog post 2 that explained how 
to animate 100,000 points with regl I knew it was enough to start with. 
At frst I hoped to get the hang of regl by going through examples. But after 
an hour or so I acknowledged the fact that I really didn’t understand anything yet 
and that I had to read some introductions to WebGL, but also to GLSL and shaders, 
two rather complex parts of drawing visuals with WebGL. It took a while, but 
my brain slowly started to grasp the main concepts. 
Feeling somewhat more enlightened on WebGL, I started with the code from 
a simple example
3 to create a single gradient colored triangle in regl. Next, I slowly 
adjusted it to show circles on a map instead. 
a b (a) (b) 
c d 
I decided not to go into 
Three.js. It was just 
too much to handle 
in one week—so many 
new programming 
libraries! 
Fig.10.6 
(a,b,c,d) 
Several steps showing 
how I transformed the 
regl based map from 
the initial example’s 
colors to the green 
colors I wanted to use. 
Well, it took a lot of browsing through example code, but eventually I had a map 
in regl with correct circles and opacities. The one thing that I just couldn’t manage 
was adding that fnal touch of a multiply blend mode, while combined with a circle 
shape and semi-transparent circles. However, even without the multiply efect, 
if I zoomed in, I saw the same pixelated efect as with Pixi! 
(ᗒᗣᗕ)՞ I did notice 
that it rendered faster than Pixi though. 
2 “Beautifully Animate Points with WebGL and regl” by Peter Beshai: 
https:/ /peterbeshai.com/blog/2017-05-26-beautifully-animate-points-with-webgl-and-regl/ 
3 Regl-demo by Adam Pearce: https:/ /bl.ocks.org/1wheel/e025cbd91ac499d360a8b3346cb6f9e7 

=== PAGE 328 ===
327 
COMMUNITY
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
a b c
Fig.10.7
(a,b,c)
Fig.10.8
a b c 
Fig.10.7 While trying to fnd information on creating anti-aliased circles (giving them 
(a,b,c) smooth edges) in regl, I came across a code snippet that showed that Pixi 
Failed attempts in actually has an “anti alias” setting! And, on one of my continuing Twitter chats,
trying to get circle 
I received an animated Pixi example that I tested with 50,000 circles which stillshapes, with difering 
opacities, plus having seemed to work smoothly. These two interesting avenues to explore brought me 
a multiply color blend back to my Pixi based map. Another hour or two of work adjusting the animated working with regl. 
Pixi example to my data, playing with some anti-aliasing things, and I was fnally 
looking at a smoothly changing map; yay! ( ＾∇＾) 
After I got Pixi working, I sent out another Twitter request to help me with the 
anti-aliasing and multiply blend mode in regl, as regl was still faster than Pixi. 
It wasn’t long before several wonderful people sent me sandbox examples
5 to try 
and tackle my issues. These examples, plus some more I had found while traversing 
the web, increased my understanding of how to tackle the anti-aliasing in regl. 
And I was fnally able to get the circles to look like actual circles in regl, too! 
(Figure 10.8) 
Fig.10.8 
Finally! Smooth anti-
aliased circles in regl. 
No multiply color blend 
mode though. 
4 Pixi circle animation example by Alastair Dant: https:/ /bl.ocks.org/rfow/55bc49a1b8f36df1e369124c53509bb9 
5 Animate 100,000 points with regl by Yannick Assogba: https:/ /bl.ocks.org/tafsiri/dba04b04ae949760f96f97a2fba23ba6 
ReGL circle animation example by Alastair Dant: http:/ /bl.ocks.org/rfow/39692bd181fb1eb0b077a4caf886b077 
Shapes and WebGL tweening by Robert Monfera: http:/ /bl.ocks.org/monfera/85aa9627de1ae521d3ac5b26c9cd1c49 

=== PAGE 329 ===
328 
NADIEH
  
a b
c d
Fig.10.9
(a,b,c,d)
a b (a) (b) 
c d (c) (d) 
Fig.10.9 
(a,b,c,d) 
Even more failed attempts in trying 
to get circle shapes, with difering 
opacities, plus having a multiply color 
blend working with regl. 

=== PAGE 330 ===
329 
COMMUNITY
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
That only left the multiply blending that was missing from the regl version. 
However, that almost turned out to be one step too far. I couldn’t fnd a single 
example of a multiply blend in WebGL, specifcally where it was based on many 
elements overlapping (not two predefned images). I did get a lot of interesting 
other color combinations though (see Figure 10.9). 
But thanks to the help and perseverance of several great people (and experts 
in WebGL) who provided me with demos
6 through my ongoing Twitter chats, I was 
eventually looking at a regl based map that had it all working—opacities, 
anti-aliased circles, and multiply! 
Know When to Ask for Help 
Although I’ve asked for help on Twitter before, no project relied on the level of 
assistance I received from many generous people like this one. I received help with 
demos and was given multiple resources and possible solutions. I literally don’t think 
I could’ve managed this project without having asked for help. 
Don’t be afraid to ask on social media or in dedicated places such as Slack 
channels or Stack Overfow (or even in real life) in case you get stuck or are looking 
for advice. The Internet can still be a great place from time to time with people willing 
to help you! 
Finally, all three map versions (canvas, Pixi, and regl) looked the same. And the 
regl based map was defnitely the fastest. I even had to slow it down to avoid 
it animating through a year too quickly! I added links to each of the three options 
on the main project page to give technically curious viewers the chance to compare 
performance. 
In terms of the page design itself, I kept it very minimal. I wanted the focus 
to be on the map, and I felt that it needed virtually no explanation. All I created 
were a simple title, legend, and a few paragraphs of text explaining the data. 
Reflections 
From ideation, data, sketching, and coding (3x even; canvas, Pixi, and regl) this 
project took almost 60 hours to complete. In short, this was a very technical project 
for me. Sure, the visual in itself isn’t as out-of-the-box as some of the other projects. 
But I had never learned so many new programming languages and libraries within 
such a short amount of time before. 
And I couldn’t have done it without the help of a lot of great people that came 
to my aid on Twitter and through other channels. Thank you to everyone who ofered 
a suggestion and sandbox examples! 
I’m guessing the regl 
multiply color blend 
issue took at least 
10 hours. 
6 Regl multiply blend weights by Ricky Reusser: https:/ /codepen.io/rsreusser/pen/YVRXzy?editors=0010 

=== PAGE 331 ===
 
Breathing Earth 
BreathingEarth.VisualCinnamon.com 
Fig.10.10Fig.10.10 
The full page of 
“Breathing Earth.” 


=== PAGE 332 ===
331 
COMMUNITY
Fig.10.12 Fig.10.13
Fig.10.14 Fig.10.15
Fig.10.11Fig.10.11 
Week 23, June, with the Northern 
Hemisphere appearing lush green 
right at the start of summer. 
Fig.10.12 Fig.10.13 
Week 40, October. The start of winter in the Northern 
Hemisphere, week 51, December. 
Fig.10.14 Fig.10.15 
A zoom in on Asia, week 23. A zoom in on North and Central 
America, week 16. 

=== PAGE 333 ===
[No text extracted]

=== PAGE 334 ===
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
655 Frustrations 
Doing Data 
Visualization 
SHIRLEY 
In February 2017, our friend Elijah Meeks made a bold claim: most people 
in data visualization end up leaving because there’s something wrong 
with the current state of the feld. That statement stirred up quite a bit 
of conversation and resulted in a community survey with 45 questions 
and 981 responses. By mid-March, Elijah had cleaned, anonymized, and 
uploaded all the data onto GitHub.
1 And I knew I had to do something 
with that data. 
APRIL – SEPTEMBER 2017 333 COMMUNITY 
1 Data Visualization Survey, 2017 Responses: 
https:/ /github.com/data-visualization-society/data_visualization_survey/blob/master/data/cleaned_survey_results_2017.csv 

=== PAGE 335 ===
334 
SHIRLEY
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
  
  
Data 
This was probably one of my favorite projects in terms of data because I didn’t have 
to do any manual data collection or cleaning. Elijah had already cleaned up all the 
survey responses and put them into a nicely formatted, (let me repeat, cleaned up) 
CSV fle. Honestly, I don’t think I’ve ever had it easier. It’s probably why I wanted 
to do the project in the frst place.
 ヾ(０∀０*★)ﾟ*･.｡ 
So with the data collection and cleanup already done (hehe), I moved 
on to analyze and explore the data. The very frst thing I did was to create a list 
of the survey questions I was interested in, and then grouped them by theme. 
(Figure 10.1, left) . 
As the premise of the survey was Elijah’s claim that practitioners were leaving 
because of the state of the feld, my primary question was: Why might people want 
to leave? But there was no such question in the survey, and those that had already 
left defnitely wouldn’t have participated in the survey. So I decided to go with 
a proxy instead: “Do you want to spend more time or less time visualizing data in the 
future?” I then organized the relevant questions into categories (Figure 10.1, right): 
The basics of their data visualization jobs. 
• Were you hired to do data visualization only? 
• What focus is data visualization in your work? 
• Is your total compensation in line with Software Engineers and UX/UI/ 
Designer roles at your level? 
The aspects of their role that might afect their job satisfaction. 
• Is there a separate group that does data visualizations or are you embedded 
in another group? 
• Are data visualization specialists represented in the leadership of your 
organization? 
• What knowledge level do your consumers have of the data you are 
visualizing? 
• How often do they consume your data visualizations? 
• How would you describe your relationship with your consumer? 
And their biggest frustration doing data visualization in their jobs. 

=== PAGE 336 ===
335 
COMMUNITY
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
Fig.10.1 
Fig.10.2
Fig.10.1 
A list of survey 
questions grouped into 
overarching themes. 
Fig.10.2 
Using bar charts to 
explore some of the 
qualitative survey 
questions. 
One of the talks at Openvis Conf 2017—which I attended right before starting 
on this project—was about Vega-Lite, a JavaScript charting library for 
quickly composing interactive graphics, and I decided to give it a try for my data 
exploration. I used histograms to look into what part of the creation process (data 
preparation, engineering, analysis, design, visualization) the respondent spent the 
most time doing at their jobs and learned that most people don’t focus on just one 
part and instead juggle most or all of the creation process. I also plugged some 
of the qualitative survey questions into bar charts and explored what technologies 
the respondents used to visualize their data, who they made visualizations for, 
and so on: 
For explanation of 
Vega-Lite, see 
“Technologies & Tools” 
at the beginning of this 
book. 


=== PAGE 337 ===
336 
SHIRLEY
   
 
 
 
 
   
  
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
I never got beyond bar charts and histograms with Vega-Lite  for this project, 
but the exploration did allow me to quickly understand the structure of the survey 
questions and responses. It taught me to work with the quantitative or multiple 
choice questions, instead of the open-ended ones whose answers were too many 
and too varied for me to analyze efciently for this project. It also helped me see the 
value in using Vega-Lite  as a quick exploration tool—a big step-up from the last 
project, where I built visualizations from scratch for every theory I wanted to test. 
Explore Data: Use Charting Libraries 
Once I have my attributes listed and my questions and hypotheses formulated, I like 
to quickly explore the data with Observable and Vega-Lite . Observable is an online 
notebook tailored for visualizations, and it lets me experiment with ideas without the 
pressure to write “beautiful” production code. I import my data into a notebook and 
use Vega-Lite  to visually test my hypothesis. 
Some common charts I use in my exploration include bar charts for comparisons, 
box plots and histograms for distributions, scatterplots for correlations, node-link 
diagrams for relationships, and line charts for temporal trends. I then note anything 
interesting in my notebook, and use those notes to inform my designs. 
Sketch 
If I were to come across 
similarly open-ended 
text nowadays, I’d 
consider looking into 
a Natural Language 
Processing (NLP) 
algorithm to analyze 
the data. 
For more explanation 
of Observable, see 
“Technologies & Tools” 
at the beginning of the 
book. 
This is why I like 
to list data types 
(quantitative, nominal, 
ordinal, temporal, 
spatial) next to the 
attributes in my frst 
step , because they 
inform the charts 
I should use for 
exploration. 
As my goal was to fgure out why people might want to leave the feld, I wanted 
to know if there was any correlation between how much time respondents spent 
on creating data visualizations, and whether they wanted to do more or less 
of it in the future. 
For my frst pass, I decided to use a stacked bar chart (Figure 10.3). The 
y-position represented the percentage of one’s day spent on data visualization, 
arranged in order from least amount of time (10%) to most amount of time (100%). 
I used color to represent whether they wanted to do more or less dataviz, with bars 
to the left of the gap being “much less” or “less,” and to the right being “same,” 
“more,” or “much more.” 
It turned out that the majority of respondents wanted to do the same or more 
data visualization going forward. I wondered if that sentiment changed if they 
were more focused on other parts of the data visualization process, such as data 
preparation, engineering, science, or design. I also wondered if I could pinpoint 
someone’s frustration with the dataviz process by examining how much of their day 
was dedicated to a specifc task, and whether they wanted to do more or less of it. 
Unfortunately, because I only thought about how to mash those three questions 
together and gave no thought to readability, the prototype ended up being really 
hard to understand. What I did realize from prototyping the stacked bar chart was 
that I was much more interested in showing the individual responses, rather than 
trying to aggregate them all together into a summary. It also taught me that too 
few people responded that they wanted to do “less” dataviz, which meant that 
it wouldn’t adequately answer the question: “Why might people leave?” 
In retrospect, this 
makes a lot of sense; 
most people answering 
a survey about data 
visualization would 
probably want to do 
more of it. 

=== PAGE 338 ===
337 
COMMUNITY
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Fig.10.3Fig.10.3 
Sketch of my idea to 
explore how much time 
respondents currently 
spend on data 
visualization versus 
how much they want 
to do it in the future. 
Code 
For my second iteration, I decided to try a beeswarm plot because I could feature 
the individual responses as dots centered around certain attributes. And I liked that 
because they use dots, beeswarm plots tend to be compact and easy to glance 
through for the big picture. 
I also decided to use the open-ended question, “What is your biggest 
frustration with doing data visualization in your job?” as the proxy for whether 
a person might leave the feld, and noted whether they answered with any 
frustration or left the question empty. I placed those who answered with 
frustrations in the left column and those who didn’t answer in the right. I also 
visualized whether dataviz was a focus of their work and placed the dots 
vertically by the answers they gave: top row for “primary,” middle for “secondary,” 
and bottom for “one of several.” I colored and positioned them horizontally by their 
years of experience and flled the dots if they meant to go into dataviz in the 
frst place: 
“one of several.” 
Fig.10.4Fig.10.4 
Beeswarm plot 
showing every 
respondent. Those 
who responded with 
frustrations are 
placed to the left and 
those without are 
to the right. They are 
grouped vertically 
by what focus dataviz 
is within their work, 
with top being 
“primary,” middle 
being “secondary,” 
and bottom being 

=== PAGE 339 ===
338 
SHIRLEY
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
      
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
I liked the beeswarm, but didn’t like how hard it was to compare those who 
responded with and without frustrations, so I stacked the two on top of each other. 
And I realized that my x-axis (how many years they had been working in the industry) 
probably had little relation with the questions I was interested in (whether dataviz 
was their primary focus, or whether dataviz was represented in their leadership) 
and whether they responded with frustrations. So I updated the colors and x-axis 
to represent percent of day focused on dataviz instead. Finally, I wanted to make 
it easy to compare across answers, so I added a box-and-whisker plot on top of the 
beeswarm to mark the median and frst and third quartites (Figure 10.5 ). 
When I showed this iteration to my friend RJ Andrews, he immediately 
suggested putting the box-and-whisker plot in the middle, the dots representing 
those with frustrations below the box-and-whisker plot, and those without 
frustrations above it. He explained the importance of visual metaphors; those 
with frustrations should “drip down” like they’re being weighed down, while those 
without frustrations should “rise up” because they were unburdened (Figure 10.6). 
Visual Metaphors 
I frst learned about visual metaphors from my friend RJ Andrews, and it’s really 
changed the way I think about designing visualizations. Visual metaphors take 
advantage of what people might already be familiar with—like having a negative feeling 
(frustrations) move downward—which can reinforce what the underlying data is, what 
the visual is trying to communicate, and potentially reduce the learning curve for 
an unfamiliar visualization. 
It’s an additional step I like to take after considering what chart type might work 
best for what I’m trying to communicate, and it defnitely makes the visualization more 
approachable and visually interesting. 
I implemented the beeswarm with D3.js’s force layout, using the positioning 
(d3.forceX()  and d3.forceY() ) and collision (d3.forceCollide()) forces 
to calculate the position of each dot. To create the middle split, I “nudged” any 
dots back if they went past a certain vertical position (called the “bounded force 
layout”). The box-and-whisker was more straightforward to implement, but still took 
many iterations until I was happy with the design. 
After I had the visualization down, I went back to the eight questions I had 
frst outlined. I wanted to be able to easily compare data between questions and 
see if there were any correlations. To do this, I decided to display two questions 
at a time and place them side by side. I added a dropdown menu to let users 
switch to diferent questions, and a brush—an interaction where the user can 
draw a bounding box within the visualization—on the beeswarms to flter survey 
responses. I implemented the brush interaction with D3.js, and used React.js 
to link the dropdowns with the beeswarms, and the beeswarms with each other. 
The goal for linking the two questions (beeswarms) via the brush flter was so that 
I could brush and flter a particular answer for one question (“those whose primary 
focus is data visualization, and who spend more than 50% of their day on it”) and 
see how the same people answered the other question (“for those same people, 
the majority of them perceive their compensation to be either in-line with or higher 
than software engineers and designers at the same level”) (Figure 10.7). 
I really like showing 
individual data points 
and layering summary 
metrics on top of them, 
and fnd that I do it 
often in my projects. 
I know I can’t assume 
that everyone who 
didn’t answer with 
frustrations was happy 
with their jobs (there’s 
defnitely a percentage 
that just didn’t want 
to answer), but it’s the 
best proxy I had. 
¯\_(ツ)_/¯

=== PAGE 340 ===
339 
COMMUNITY
Fig.10.5 Fig.10.6 
Fig.10.7 
Fig.10.5 
Adjusted beeswarm plot. Those with and without 
frustrations are placed on top of each other 
instead of side-by-side, and box-and-whisker plots 
are overlaid to give additional context. 
Fig.10.6 
Final beeswarm plot with respondents 
rising or dripping based on whether they 
answered with frustrations. 
Fig.10.7 
Selecting a diferent question 
from the dropdown updates the 
corresponding beeswarm (top), and 
brushing the beeswarm fades out all 
other respondents whose answers 
didn’t fall within the brush’s bounding 
box (bottom). 

=== PAGE 341 ===
340 
SHIRLEY
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
I then used my newly completed exploratory tool to try and answer my original 
question: “Why are people leaving the feld?” I went through each of the eight 
questions, fltered their answers, and jotted down any interesting things I noticed. 
After doing the analysis, I realized I could center my observations around what 
a “successful” data visualization role might look like: a role with a higher perceived 
salary that allowed the person to spend a large percent of their time on creating 
data visualization. I used those two metrics and looked through the answers for 
what might correlate with “unsuccessful” dataviz roles that might cause someone 
to leave. I found that those roles were typically found: 
• On an embedded team, 
• Not hired to work on data visualization, 
• Does data visualization as only one of several tasks, and 
• Has a subordinate relationship with the stakeholder of their visualization. 
I fltered for the respondents that fell within those four situations, collected their 
frustrations, and tried my best to categorize their frustrations (Figure 10.8). 
I wrote a blog post
2 centered around what I learned, where I outlined what 
factors contributed to more or less time spent working on data visualizations 
(being on a dedicated dataviz team, as opposed to on an embedded team), and 
what led to higher or lower perceived salaries (primary focus on dataviz, with 
a collaborative relationship with stakeholders). I then outlined the most common 
frustrations that I came across and put them into two categories: those stemming 
from working relationships in the organization (“coworkers do not understand what 
is possible,” etc.), and those related to working with the available technology. Finally, 
I presented what we could potentially do to alleviate those frustrations: to educate 
organizations on how efective visualizations can beneft them, and to provide 
resources on continuous education for dataviz practitioners. 
Reflections 
Even though I really, really abhorred all the writing, I’m happy with all the research 
and analysis I put into my blog post. And though there are always things I want 
to improve, I’m also satisfed with my fnal visualization. I was able to take away 
two important lessons: 
1. Use Vega-Lite or other similar charting libraries to quickly explore the data. 
2. Use visual metaphors to better communicate the nature of the dataset 
(and more often than not, make the visualization more interesting). 
Most importantly, I’m glad I learned so much while analyzing the survey data and 
writing about the community’s frustrations. It has informed a lot of what I do inside 
and outside of my work—from prototyping ideas and teaching my clients how 
to think about data to getting better at designing efective visualizations. It has 
motivated me to create workshops and talks for front-end developers with the end 
goal of making D3.js and data visualization more approachable. 
2 “655 Frustrations of Doing Data Visualizations”: 
https:/ /medium.com/visualizing-the-feld/655-frustrations-doing-data-visualization-e1087c8176fc 

=== PAGE 342 ===
341 
COMMUNITY
Fig.10.8 
Fig.10.8 
I printed out all the frustrations that fell under the four situations 
(embedded team, dataviz only one of several responsibilities, 
subordinate relationship with stakeholders, perceived lower 
salaried) and tried to categorize their frustrations. 

=== PAGE 343 ===
 
655 Frustrations 
shirleywu.studio/projects/community 


=== PAGE 344 ===
343 
COMMUNITY
Fig.10.9Fig.10.9 
The fnal visual tool 
for exploring the 2017 
Data Visualization 
Community Survey. 


=== PAGE 345 ===
344 
MYTHS & 
LEGEN 

=== PAGE 346 ===
345 
THS & 
LEGENDS 

=== PAGE 347 ===
[No text extracted]

=== PAGE 348 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 Figures 
in the Sky 
NADIEH 
This project took a long time to fgure out topic-wise and to create; I even 
fnished the next scheduled project (about “Fearless”) before this one. 
There were several avenues that Shirley and I investigated (Cinderella, 
Disney), but they didn’t pan out. And so, many months after my previous 
project, while at OpenVisConf in Paris, I decided to look for completely 
diferent ideas. The talks defnitely inspired me, especially one about 
Google’s Quickdraw dataset. I thought, maybe I’d make something about 
the “mythical” creatures from the Quickdraw word list and how they’re 
drawn, like dragons and mermaids? Something about dragons in general? 
Or about myths from many diferent cultures and their timelines and 
similarities? Unfortunately, that would probably mean a lot of manual data 
gathering. But myths across cultures … that suddenly reminded me 
of constellations! Many constellations have been named after characters 
from certain myths and legends. My favorite constellations are Orion and 
the Swan (ofcially known as Cygnus). But what did other cultures make 
of those same stars? What shapes and fgures did they see in the same sky? 
That idea sparked a feeling of enthusiasm 
and wonder in me in such a way that I knew 
it felt right. 
As an astronomer, it also felt kind of appropriate to have my fnal Data 
Sketches project to be connected to actual stars. 
MAY – JULY 2018 347 MYTHS & LEGENDS 

=== PAGE 349 ===
348 
NADIEH
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
      
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
Fig.11.1
Data 
Fig.11.1 
Stellarium’s data to 
create “stick fgures” 
between the stars. 
Of course, that idea still hinged on data availability. I thought that the subject 
I had chosen would be specifc enough for Google. But alas, trying to search for 
constellation data was heavily intermixed with astrology. 
(ー_ー*; ) 
I found some promising information about the “modern” 88 constellations, 
but nothing about constellations from multiple cultures. That is, until I came across 
Stellarium, an amazing open source 3D planetarium software and all its data can 
be accessed on GitHub. The giant cherry on the cake is a folder
1 called “skycultures” 
which contains information on constellations from ±25 diferent cultures from across 
the world, including Aztec, Hawaiian, Japanese, Navajo, and many more. This data 
was exactly what I needed, but it wasn’t available in a simple CSV format, nor in the 
shape that I wanted for my visualization. Luckily, Stellarium has a very extensive user 
guide
2 that explains exactly how to interpret the data. 
For example, Figure 11.1 shows the data to create “stick fgures,” or the lines 
between stars. Each row is one constellation, with the constellation’s ID listed in the 
beginning, followed by the number of connections (lines) in the constellation. After 
that come the so-called Hipparcos (HIP) star IDs. Each pair of HIP IDs defnes a line 
between those two stars. 
I converted these fles into something very similar to the typical links fle 
of a network, with a source_id  and target_id  per row, having one row for 
each line to draw in the stick fgure/constellation. 
I pulled the full names of the constellations from a diferent Stellarium dataset 
and created another fle that contains all the constellation IDs that a specifc star 
is connected to. However, there was still one important “subject” that I was missing 
in terms of data: the stars. 
Thankfully, that’s a dataset I’m already familiar with and have used in a few 
other astronomer themed visualizations. The HYG database
3 contains lots 
of information about many, many stars. From that database I took the right 
ascension and declination so I could place the stars on a map (you can think 
of these as the latitude and longitude of the sky). But I needed more information, 
such as the HIP ID, to connect them to the constellation data from Stellarium. I also 
found the apparent magnitude, which represents how bright the star looks, to use 
as a star’s size, and fnally the star’s color index to get an efective temperature, 
which could then be mapped to a color for the stars. It would be a shame not 
to color the stars the way they actually appear to us. 
The HIP ID was the 
unique key that made 
it possible to link the 
constellation data from 
Stellarium to the star 
data from the HYG 
database. 
1 Stellarium skycultures folder: https:/ /github.com/Stellarium/stellarium/tree/master/skycultures 
2 Stellarium user guide: https:/ /github.com/Stellarium/stellarium/releases/download/v0.19.1/stellarium_user_guide-0.19.1-1.pdf 
3 HYG database: https:/ /github.com/astronexus/HYG-Database 

=== PAGE 350 ===
349 
MYTHS & LEGENDS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.11.2
To stay true to how we see the night sky, I fltered the stars to only include those 
that are bright enough to be seen by the naked eye, which is an apparent magnitude 
smaller than 6.5. 
In addition to sky maps with constellations, I also wanted to display something 
more “statistical” using a bigger set of data. What sparked my interest was 
seeing how the data looked when I plotted a star’s brightness versus the number 
of constellations that each star is used in. Was there a trend? If so, which stars 
deviated and why? I made a quick plot in R using ggplot2 (Figure 11.2) that revealed 
some interesting insights, specifcally, insights around which stars deviated from the 
general trend of “the brighter a star, the more constellations that use it.” 
In astronomy the 
smaller the apparent 
magnitude, the brighter 
the star appears to us. 
Fig.11.2 
A scatter plot 
made in R showing 
apparent magnitude 
versus the number 
of constellations a 
star is part of, for 
approximately 2,200 
stars. 
However, while investigating this scatter plot more closely, I noticed that my star 
data was missing many proper star names. Almost all nine stars of the Pleiades were 
not named! I searched for a bigger list of named stars and found a sort-of ofcial list 
of ±350 stars on Wikipedia.
4 
However, these only contained the names themselves, not the HIP IDs needed 
to connect them to my data. Thankfully, there is a website called the Universe 
Guide
5 where the URLs are based on the star’s name, while the page itself contains 
the HIP ID in the HTML ’s h1  header (title) of the page. I therefore used the rvest 
package in R to download the Universe Guide page of all of the stars on the wiki list, 
grabbed the h1  from the HTML, and only kept the HIP id . I only had to do a few 
manual lookups for names that didn’t return results from the Universe Guide through 
my script. Finally, I merged this “proper star names” dataset into the original HYG 
dataset for a much more complete set of star names. 
A fnal note about the data: there are no ofcially declared constellation 
fgures. There are indeed 88 ofcial constellations, but the only thing that is 
recorded is what area of the sky that constellation takes up (kind of like how the US 
states divide up the land). There is no ofcial consensus on how the stick fgure part 
of the constellation should be drawn. I’ve therefore decided to use the data from 
Stellarium as my “single source of truth.” 
By proper names of 
stars I mean their 
popular/common 
names instead of their 
catalogue IDs, such 
as the star names 
Betelgeuse and Sirius. 
I copied the Wikipedia 
list of 350 star names 
into Excel using its 
“data from web” import 
option. 
4 List of proper names of stars: https:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_proper_names_of_stars 
5 Universe Guide website: https:/ /www.universeguide.com/star/atlas 
