

--- PAGE 351 ---
350 
NADIEH
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
Fig.11.3
Sketch 
Fig.11.3 
Brainstorming concept 
ideas and data to use 
for this project. 
This project was pretty light on actual “design” sketching. That’s mostly because 
the basic idea was quite simple: I would focus on one star and visualize all the 
constellations that use that star. I created a sketch that surrounded a star with 
a donut-like mini chart that would show the constellations it appeared in. You can 
see the tiny sketch from my brainstorm in Figure 11.3 (bottom of the left page). 
I wanted the star map to look like a combination between current and ancient 
sky maps. An example of the latter is the exquisite illustration made by the author 
Alexander Jamieson in 1822 (see Figure 11.4). 
That’s three projects 
in a row with very little 
sketching—defnitely 
unusual for me! 
Another part of the project that took up more pages in my little notebook was math 
(as usual). If there were multiple constellations with a line between the same two 
stars, I wanted to draw those lines side by side. I started out thinking it would require 
some trigonometry, with four diferent cases. In Figure 11.5 you can see how I tried 
to conclude if there were diferent solutions for the four orientations. However, 
it eventually all came down to a little vector math; I had to fnd the normal vector, 
which is simple to calculate, and I needed each new line from a constellation to 
move up a little farther along the normal vector. The red sort-of-circle in the middle-
left of Figure 11.5 b shows when I fnally realized the normal vector was all I needed. 
Learn to Love Math 
Math is truly your best friend in creating more unique data visuals. And although it’s 
usually trigonometry, this time knowing just a little bit of linear algebra/vector math 
helped turn a rather difcult problem into a straightforward approach. 
The four were cases 
being defned by how 
the target star was 
positioned relative to 
the source star, in the 
top-right quadrant, or 
any of the other three 
quadrants. 
The normal vector lies 
perpendicular to the 
line you’re focusing 
on, making a straight 
angle. 

--- PAGE 352 ---
351 
MYTHS & LEGENDS
  
a b
Fig.11.4Fig.11.4 
Plate 1 from A Celestial 
Atlas by Alexander 
Jamieson from 1822. 
a b 
Fig.11.5Fig.11.5 
(a & b)(a & b) 
Sketches about fguring out how to 
get lines next to each other. 

--- PAGE 353 ---
352 
NADIEH
(a) (b)
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
a b c
Fig.11.6
(a,b,c)
a bFig.11.7 
(a & b)
Finally, I made some sketches of the general page layout. The title would stand out 
nicely against a background of the night sky. With the sky maps themselves already 
providing more than enough aesthetically, I wanted to simplify the other elements 
of the text and layout. 
a b c 
(c) 
Fig.11.6 
(a,b,c) 
Sketching out the 
layout of the page 
in later stages of the 
project. 
(b) 
Code 
My frst goal, before focusing on the actual data visualization side of things, was 
to create a “base map” of the sky. I’ve never created one, so I did a little research 
on what kind of map projection is typically used for sky maps. (I decided to go with 
a stereographic one.) 
I never truly worked 
with projections beforeGiven this map would include 9,000 stars for the full sky, mini donut charts, outside of the default 
and many constellation lines, I set out to create this project with canvas due to its Mercator projection. 
better performance. I loaded my star data and set up my code following several 
D3.jsba sed examples of sky maps.6 But all my code produced was a thin stripe 
of stars. ಥ﹏ಥ (see Figure 11.7 a). 
Fig.11.7 a b (b) 
(a & b) 
The very frst results 
on screen, failing frst, 
but getting it right the 
second time. 


--- PAGE 354 ---
353 
MYTHS & LEGENDS
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
a b c
Fig.11.8 
(a,b,c)
After a more careful comparison of the other sky map examples and mine, I realized 
I forgot an easy-to-miss transformation calculation of the RA (right ascension) 
and declination. A few code adjustments later and I had the map from Figure 11.7 
b. However, it was still too abstract for me to see if it was correct or just a random 
collection of points. I felt that the one thing that would probably help me realize 
if the stars were correctly plotted was to add the graticule lines, the background 
grid. Thankfully the D3.jsbased sky map examples helped out again. When 
I rotated the projection to face North, added the stick fgure lines for the modern 
constellations, and even recognized a few, I fnally knew for sure that the stars were 
in the correct location (Figure 11.8). 
For the rest of the sky map, I focused mostly on the central star of Orion, 
my favorite constellation for a variety of reasons: it contains many bright stars, 
is easy to pick out, and I could look at it from the living room window of my childhood 
home for many winters. 
a b c 
Fig.11.8 
(a,b,c) 
Steps in setting up the sky map, such as adding 
a background graticule, rotating it to face North, 
and zooming in on Orion. 
Remix What’s Out There 
Mentally, it’s sometimes easier to get started on a project when you don’t have 
to do everything from scratch. Even though the code for the D3.js based sky map 
examples wasn’t very long or intricate, I felt it was just the right thing for me to use 
as a base to start working from. Beginning from some basic code examples can help 
unblock you and allow you to build on something. And I don’t mean just plug your own 
data into the base code and calling it fnished! I mean to truly remix it and turn it into 
a new visual that takes the quirks of your data into account and has its own style. 
(Think “inspired by” instead of “cheap knock-of”.) 
6 Star Map by Mike Bostock: https:/ /observablehq.com/@mbostock/star-map and Sky by Matteo Abrate: http:/ /bl.ocks.org/nitaku/9607405 

--- PAGE 355 ---
354 
NADIEH
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
 
 
Fig.11.9
As you can see in the images of Figure 11.7 and 11.8, I was already using the 
magnitude to scale the radius of each star; the brighter they appear to us, the 
bigger the circle. Now it was time to look at the colors of these circles. I started 
with a temperature-to-color-scale I’d already investigated and developed to be 
very similar to the star’s actual perceivable colors for a previous astronomy-related 
project. For a while I played around with making the colors more vibrant, but that 
made the sky way too colorful. 
Fig.11.9 
A much too saturated 
colorful sky. 
But even with the more real and nuanced colors and adding a glow to each star 
(with canvas’ useful shadowBlur  property), the bigger stars looked a bit fat. 
In reality, our Sun looks a bit brighter in the center and dimmer around the edge. 
Luckily, canvas has the option to create radial gradients, which I could use 
to set up a unique gradient for each star: I’d have a base color for each star using 
a slightly lighter color in the center and a darker color at the edge (I used chroma. 
js to create the lighter and darker color from the base color). It took some 
experimentation to fgure out the best settings. Figure 11.10 a, where I made the stars 
bigger to better assess the gradients, was defnitely not correct. 

--- PAGE 356 ---
355 
MYTHS & LEGENDS
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
a bFig.11.10 Fig.11.10 a b 
(a & b)(a & b) 
Trying to create 
a unique (sometimes 
tiny) gradient for 
each star 
I clipped the sky map to a circle with a dashed line around it and added a separate 
dashed line inside the map to show the so-called ecliptic, for embellishment. This 
is the path that the Sun makes across the sky relative to us. Because our Earth’s 
rotational axis is tilted by 23.44° with respect to the plane in which the planets 
go around the Sun, the ecliptic is not a straight line across the image (following 
the 0° declination line). 
For the points where the background lines touch the sky map’s edge 
I added the RA and declination degrees. I really liked the use of the zodiac signs 
in Alexander Jamieson’s map from Figure 11.4 and replaced the degree number 
by the corresponding zodiac signs for 12 “major-RA ” lines. 
Fig.11.11Fig.11.11 
(a & b)(a & b) 
aa bb 
Clipping to a circle and adding the ecliptic 
path on the left, while calculating where the 
background grid touches the circle boundary for 
degree notations and zodiac signs on the right. 

--- PAGE 357 ---
356 
NADIEH
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.11.12 
(a,b,c,d)
a b
dc
Fig.11.12 
(a,b,c,d) 
Slowly building up a 
“swirly background” 
using the contour 
function of D3.js. 
Having fnished with the lines, it was time for the fnal big aspect that I had in mind 
for the sky map base: space itself. The background color (“space”) up until this point 
was a dark blue. I really wanted to add some depth to each image by mimicking 
lighter colored streaks across the background, inspired by the gorgeous streaks 
of the Milky Way. Not long before, I’d seen some great experiments and bloopers 
from a friend that was using the contouring options of D3.jsand r emembered that 
it gave exactly the kind of feeling I was looking for with my “outer space.” I started 
to experiment with the contour functionality and, after several iterations, built 
something I was happy with (see Figure 11.12) 
A North and South pointer as the fnal ornamental element and my night 
sky base map was done! (See Figure 11.13) I was fnally ready for the actual data 
visualization part of this project. 
(๑•`ㅂ•´)ง✧ 
a b (a) (b) 
c (c) d 

--- PAGE 358 ---
357 
MYTHS & LEGENDS
Fig.11.13
Fig.11.13 
The fnal result of the base 
sky map. Now the data 
visualization would still 
need to be overlayed. 

--- PAGE 359 ---
358 
NADIEH
(a) (b)
(a) (b)
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
Fig.11.15 
(a & b)
a b
The end goal was to visualize how many constellations used each star. I started with 
creating a small donut chart around each star that was part of a constellation. Even 
though one star would be chosen to focus the visualization on, many neighboring 
stars would also be included in the diferent constellations. I frst created simple 
I chose to switch and 
focus on the brightestdonut charts featuring only white slices. When that was working and looked good star in the night sky,
I turned it into a colored version with rounded edges and a bit of padding. Sirius. 
Fig.11.14Fig.11.14 
(a & b)(a & b) 
Creating a mini donut 
chart around each 
constellation star. 
aa bb 
The lines in between the stars were a bit of a diferent story. I wanted these lines 
to be placed alongside each other, but I only had the exact center location of each 
star, so calculating the ofset in the x- and y-direction that each extra line would 
need wasn’t trivial, I thought. Until I fnally remembered not to think in trigonometry, 
which created the wrong image of Figure 11.15 a, but in vectors and the normal 
vector (resulting in Figure 11.15 b). 
You could already see 
my (mostly useless) 
math in the “Sketch” 
section earlier. 
Fig.11.15 
(a & b) 
Positioning the lines 
to run parallel between 
the stars—doing it 
wrong at frst and 
corrected eventually. 
a b 


--- PAGE 360 ---
359 
MYTHS & LEGENDS
(b)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.11.16 
(a & b)
Fig.11.17
a b
Fig.11.16 
(a & b) 
Focusing on (the white 
circle) Betelgeuse 
(in the modern 
constellation of Orion) 
and on Sirius in a 
star-line from Hawaiian 
culture. 
Fig.11.17 
The separate 
constellations in a ring 
around the main sky 
map. 
a b
(a) 
Working with the diferent constellations showed me that using one particular zoom 
level and center would defnitely not work to properly reveal each of the separate 
constellations. It took me a while to fnally fgure out the logic and to automatically 
calculate the optimum zoom level, rotation, and center that would nicely ft any 
constellation that I would give the program (see Figure 11.16). 
To make it easier to select and see the full shape of each separate constellation 
(using the same star), I added all of the separate constellations in a ring around the 
version that showed all of the constellations at once. 

--- PAGE 361 ---
360 
NADIEH
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.11.18Fig.11.18 
The fnal look of the 
circular sky map 
with the mini circles 
around it. 
That immediately showed me two things. For one, this was excruciatingly slow! 
But also, the complete sky map on the mini circles wasn’t needed at all. They were 
too small to really have any visual efect, and they were too distracting from the 
central map. Luckily, removing elements from the mini maps would also make them 
faster to load. The main thing to see were the constellation shapes anyway, which 
was the most performant part of the sky map’s three layers: the glowing stars, the 
constellation lines and donut charts, and the entire background. After some fddling 
around, I got it all working and ended up with the version from Figure 11.18. Finally, 
I added an interaction that allowed visitors to click any of the outside mini circles 
to see it drawn properly, and bigger, in the center (see Figure 11.30 for an example 
of selecting an outside mini circle). 
I could’ve stopped there. The sky map was a complete visualization in its own 
right. But just showing the star Betelgeuse felt so incomplete! I had so much more 
data that I could use to tell a fuller and more interesting story. So even though I had 
already racked up way too many hours to get to this point, I decided that this project 
would become a complete article; with beginning, middle, and end. (In other words, 
even more visuals. 
(◍•﹏•))


--- PAGE 362 ---
361 
MYTHS & LEGENDS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.11.19
Fig.11.20
An (almost) full sky map that would show all of the constellations of one chosen 
culture was the frst on my list. It would allow users to select a culture and view its 
constellations separately. Given how complete my circular sky map function was, 
setting up the base for this was quite easy. In essence, the only change I had to make 
was to adjust the projection from stereographic to an equirectangular one (while 
also using a diferent width/height and not clipping the visual to a circle). For this 
full sky map I made sure to have the background fuzzy patches follow the actual 
rough location of the Milky Way. 
Fig.11.19 
The full sky, now with the background 
fuzzy patches sort-of following the 
shape of the Milky Way. 
Betelgeuse might be a fascinating star, but I wanted to reveal many more interesting 
stars and constellations! The function to create the full sky map with all of its 
constellations could be used for any star, thankfully. What did end up taking several 
hours was the exact design of these extra sky maps on the page and manually going 
through about a hundred stars and selecting the ±15 I thought looked the most 
interesting and diverse. 
I was quite happy with 
the result, so I decided 
to use it for the header 
of the full article as well. 
Fig.11.20 
An early look of several smaller sky maps, 
each focusing on a diferent star. 

--- PAGE 363 ---
362 
NADIEH
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
a b c
Fig.11.21 (a,b,c)
The fnal visual pieces to add to the page were the statistical charts, starting 
with the scatter plot that displayed a star’s brightness versus the number 
of constellations it was a part of. As ±2,200 stars were included in at least one 
constellation, I went for canvas as the base. However, I used a separate SVG on 
top for all the axes, text, interactivity, and annotations. Using canvas made it easy 
to reuse the same coloring of the stars as I had in the sky maps. However, with the 
white background those colors looked much too soft, and the gradient efect was 
too distracting (Figure 11.21 a). Removing the gradient and adding a multiply efect 
to darken any overlapping stars helped to make it visually more appealing (see 
Figure 11.21 b). However, I felt that the colors were still too soft. So I made them more 
vibrant, added a bit of “glow” around the edges, cleaned up the axes a bit, and the 
visual style of the scatterplot was done (see Figure 11.21 c). Eventually, I also added 
a mouse hover and textual annotations. 
a b c 
Fig.11.21 (a,b,c) 
First using the same star colors and gradients as I did for the 
sky maps, but later going for darker colors and no gradient, 
and fnally even more vibrant and glowing stars. 
Annotations Are of Vital Importance 
Often overlooked, annotations are one of the best ways to make a chart understandable 
to an audience. Underutilized in many data visualizations, annotations are the ideal way 
to highlight exactly those things that you, as the creator, want the audience to pay 
attention to. My current go-to is the wonderful d3-annotations library. And I think 
the scatter plot from this project has the most intricate placement of annotations that 
I’ve ever applied (see Figure 11.26 later in this chapter for the fully annotated version). 
At the bottom of the article I added a section that tells more about each 
culture. Selecting a culture results in the full sky map updating to show all of the 
constellations from that culture. And a bar chart that I had in mind with the average 
number of stars per culture eventually ended up as a small mini bar in each of the 
culture “boxes” (Figure 11.22). 

--- PAGE 364 ---
363 
MYTHS & LEGENDS
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Fig.11.22
Fig.11.22 And then! Then I replaced as many of the visuals as I could with images. (●__●) 
All the sky cultures in Images are much easier to load than doing the heavy sky map calculation, and the 
their own overview. sky maps wouldn’t change anyway. 
Adding in text between all the diferent visuals, and my second (and thankfully 
last) full article style data visualization was fnally done! 
Reflections 
This was my longest project in terms of hourly investment. I clocked about 
110 hours, but estimate I spent more than that, due to not always timing myself 
whenever I thought something would take fve minutes to do, and suddenly, 
I was an hour in. Some parts took an unexpected amount of time to work on, 
such as setting up the functionality to create a base sky map that could handle 
any star and constellation combination. I am generally less enthusiastic about 
working on overall page layouts, but I spent extra time trying to perfect this layout 
since it was a vital part of the story. 
Even though it took so long, I’m super happy to have created a project that 
combines my love of astronomy with my passion for dataviz! Especially since this 
was, for me, my farewell to the creation of new visualizations as a part of Data 
Sketches. I’m amazed at all the things that I’ve learned about making data visual 
across the 12 topics. And it’s fascinating to look back at my skills for the very frst 
project and comparing that to the full-length article that my fnal project became. 
I’m exceptionally happy to have been a part of Data Sketches. It has opened 
doors to opportunities that I didn’t even know I was looking for! 
“Beautiful in English” 
isn’t far behind in terms 
of hours spent. 
I ain’t ever doing it 
again though. Damn, 
such work!! [¬°-°]¬ 

--- PAGE 365 ---
 
Fig.11.23
Figures in the Sky 
FiguresInTheSky.VisualCinnamon.com 
Fig.11.23 
The start of the “Figures 
in the Sky” article. 

--- PAGE 366 ---
365 
MYTHS & LEGENDS
Fig.11.24
Fig.11.25
Fig.11.26
Fig.11.24 
The many constellations that 
use the star Dubhe, part of the 
well-known Big Dipper. 
Fig.11.25 
All constellations that are connected to the star Deneb. 
In Western cultures its constellation is known as 
Cygnus (the Swan), but it is also part of the “Summer 
Triangle,” a very easy-to-make-out group of three 
stars in the high of a Summer night on the Northern 
hemisphere. 
Fig.11.26 
The full sky map showing all 88 
“modern” (Western) constellations. 

--- PAGE 367 ---
366 
NADIEH
 
Fig.11.27Fig.11.27 
This beauty of a constellation comes from several 
tribes in South America and is called Veado (which 
Google tells me is similar to “deer”). I would say 
that it seems a bit too specifc for a constellation 
that can “easily” be found in the sky, but that’s 
perhaps my own bias of having lived in very light-
polluted areas all my life. 
Fig.11.28Fig.11.28 
After highlighting 
the constellations 
of Betelgeuse, Sirius 
and Deneb, the 
article lets the viewer 
inspect 15 more stars 
by clicking on any 
of the mini images. 


--- PAGE 368 ---
367 
MYTHS & LEGENDS
 
Fig.11.29
Fig.11.30
Fig.11.29 
A scatter plot showing all ±2,200 
stars that are included in at least 
one constellation. 
Fig.11.30 
The full sky map of the 318 diferent 
Chinese constellations. 

--- PAGE 369 ---
[no text]

--- PAGE 370 ---
369 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Legends 
SHIRLEY 
Just like Nadieh, it took me forever to decide on a good dataset and angle 
for this project. We chose “Myths & Legends” because it sounded like 
a great topic with a lot of potential, but the ideas I came up with either 
didn’t excite me much or were difcult from a data gathering perspective. 
I wanted to do something related to my Chinese background and bounced 
from Chinese and Asian mythology to classic Chinese literature to 
Mythbusters episodes. 
Then, the idea came to me after watching Crazy Rich Asians. I loved 
Michelle Yeoh in the movie, but it wasn’t until I read more about her that 
I learned how accomplished and legendary she was. It made me wonder 
about all of the legendary women across history that I’ve never heard 
of, and the idea took shape from there. 
DECEMBER 2018 MYTHS & LEGENDS 

--- PAGE 371 ---
370 
SHIRLEY
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data 
Once I had the idea about doing something with legendary women, the next step 
was fguring out how to get the data. I decided early on that Wikipedia, with its user-
generated content, would be a great resource. I wanted to fgure out a way to get 
the “top” women on the platform, but ran into a tricky problem: I didn’t have any idea 
how to defne “top.” Would it be page views? Page length? Inbound links? And even 
though I had seen something similar on The Pudding—they were even awesome 
enough to write about their methodology
1—I still wasn’t sure how to go about 
adopting their approach for my own project. 
Then, it hit me: instead of trying to defne “top” myself, I should just look for 
a defnitive list. After a few Google searches, I ended up on a Wikipedia page with 
a list of the 51 female Nobel Laureates. They were all incredible women, yet I hadn’t 
heard of most of them. It was the perfect dataset. 
I copy-pasted the table—with information about the category (Peace, 
Literature, Physiology or Medicine, Chemistry, Physics, Economic Sciences) 
and year of their awards, as well as the achievements that led to the award— 
into a spreadsheet and did some light formatting and cleaning. I exported the 
spreadsheet as a CSV and used an online converter to get the data into 
JSON format. 
Because I also wanted to get data from the laureates’ individual Wikipedia 
pages, I researched for ways to access the Wikipedia API. It was a little hard 
to navigate (I wasn’t sure if I should use Wikidata or MediaWiki, which are the two 
options that came up when I searched “Wikipedia API”), but thankfully The Pudding 
had me covered. A quick dig through their repo led me to their code that used 
wiki.js, and I could interface with that Node.js package instead of the actual 
Wikipedia API. 
After that, I wrote a script using wiki.js to programmatically get additional 
data from each woman’s Wikipedia page, including basic biographical information, 
the number of links into their page (“backlinks”), and the number of sources at the 
bottom of their page. 
Sketch 
The Pudding is the 
same awesome visual 
essay collective 
I published my 
“Hamilton” project on! 
This is one of the 
most important data 
gathering lessons 
I learned from Nadieh: 
spreadsheets are 
great for cleaning 
data. The extended 
lesson is to use the 
right tool for the job, 
instead of trying to 
use the same hammer 
(code) every time. 
In early 2018, my friend and I pitched a design to a potential client. We didn’t get the 
contract, but the core idea—to represent the individual data points as multifaceted 
crystals—really stuck with me. I pinned some gorgeous photos and paintings 
of crystals and mused how I could programmatically recreate them. 
Fast-forward to fall 2018 and I had the idea of legendary women but wasn’t 
sure how I wanted to visualize them. Then, one day as I was going through the 
“Information Is Beautiful Awards” shortlist and pinning my favorite entries, I came 
across the crystals again in one of my Pinterest boards. As soon as I saw artist 
Rebecca Chaperon’s gorgeous paintings of crystals,
2 I knew I wanted to represent 
each of the legendary women as one of those bright, colorful crystals—because 
how beautiful would that be? 
1 The Pudding, “What Does the Path to Fame Look Like?”: https:/ /pudding.cool/2018/10/wiki- breakout/ 
2 Rebecca Chaperon, “Crystals”: https:/ /www.thechaperon.ca/gallery/crystals 

--- PAGE 372 ---
371 
MYTHS & LEGENDS
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
   
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
It wasn’t long before I had come up with the other details. The size of the crystal 
would represent the number of articles linking back to a laureate’s Wikipedia page 
(her “infuence”). The number of faces on the crystal would map to the number 
of sources at the bottom of her page (because she’s “multi-faceted”; get it? 
(*≧艸≦), 
and the colors would represent the award category. 
The only thing that evaded me was how to position the crystals. For the longest 
time, I could only think to lay them out in a two-dimensional grid and have the reader 
scroll through them. But then I took Matt DesLauriers’s “Creative Coding” workshop 
on Frontend Masters3, where he taught (among other things) Three.js and 
WebGL. The workshop inspired me to try out a 3D layout, and I knew immediately 
that I would use the z-axis for the date they received their award: the closer to the 
foreground, the more recent her award. 
All of this came to me so quickly and naturally, that I didn’t draw a single sketch 
of the idea. 
Code 
For more explanation 
of Three.js 
and WebGL, see 
“Technologies & Tools” 
at the beginning 
of the book. 
For years I wanted to make something physical, and in 2018, I made it a goal 
to create a physical installation. But every time I thought about it, I got stuck 
thinking about 2D projections (or TVs) on walls; I didn’t know how to take 
advantage of all that foor space. 
And then one day, it hit me: of course I didn’t know how to think in physical 
spaces, I worked digitally in 2D all day long. So if I could teach myself to work in 3D 
digitally, then it should (hopefully) follow that I could think in physical spaces also. 
I put Three.js and WebGL at the top of my list of technologies to learn. 
I took Matt’s Frontend Masters workshop and learned the basics 
of Three.js, fragment shaders, and vertex shaders. I learned the “right-hand 
rule” to orient myself in WebGL ’s coordinate system: with my right palm facing 
me, use the thumb for the x-axis (increases going right), index fnger for the y-axis 
(increases going up, which is the opposite of SVG and canvas), and the middle 
fnger for the z-axis (increases coming out of the screen and towards us). I learned 
that WebGL ’s coordinate system doesn’t operate in pixels, but rather in “units” 
of measurement that we can think of as feet or meters or whatever we like, as long 
as we’re consistent. 
In mid-November, David Ronai asked me if I was interested in participating 
in Christmas Experiments, an annual WebGL advent calendar. I was hesitant 
to accept, since I had never worked with WebGL before, but David encouraged 
me to give it a try and promised to put me later in the month to give me more 
time. I agreed, knowing that the deadline would give me the motivation I needed 
to complete the project. I made it a goal to do a little bit each weekday starting 
December 1st, until I could get to something presentable on the 23rd—the slotted 
date for my Christmas Experiment. 
I started by reading the frst two chapters of WebGL Programming Guide,
4 
which taught me how WebGL was set up. I then rewatched the Three.js section 
of Matt’s workshop so that I could see what heavy lifting it was doing for me. 
After the workshop, I created an Observable notebook to fgure out the minimum 
amount of setup required to draw with Three.js. 
I always like 
understanding the 
most fundamental 
building blocks 
required to make 
something work—the 
core foundation of a 
technology or library. 
3 Matt DesLauriers on Frontend Masters: https:/ /frontendmasters.com/teachers/matt-deslauriers/ 

--- PAGE 373 ---
372 
SHIRLEY
  
     
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
Fig.11.1 
Fig.11.2
After setting up the notebook, I wanted to create a crystal shape. I decided 
to use Three.js’s PolyhedronGeometry  because I could defne a set of points 
and specify which three points would make up each triangular face. On the frst 
day, I only managed to create a triangle, but on the second day, I managed a 3D 
(rotating!) crystal as well as the crystal shape I had in mind (Figure 11.1). And even 
though I later found a better and easier way to create the crystals I wanted, 
I’m really grateful for the practice PolyhedronGeometry  gave me to think 
through WebGL ’s x, y, and z coordinates. 
Fig.11.1 
Notes trying to fgure 
out the math for where 
to position the points, 
and the two resulting 
successful crystal 
shapes. 
Once I was satisfed with the shapes, I moved on to learning how to add color 
to them. I went back through the workshop’s section on vertex and fragment 
shaders and played around with Matt’s fragment shader code (Figure 11.2), which 
taught me some commonly-used GLSL (OpenGL Shading Language) functions. 
Fig.11.2 
Experimenting with 
Matt’s fragment 
shader code. 
Shaders were originally 
computer programs 
used for shading, 
but are now used in 
a variety of ways in 
computer graphics. 
In WebGL, fragment 
shaders are used to 
color a shape, and 
vertex shaders are 
used to manipulate the 
position of each point 
in a shape. 
4 Matsuda & Lea, “WebGL Programming Guide”: https:/ /sites.google.com/site/webglbook/ 

--- PAGE 374 ---
373 
MYTHS & LEGENDS
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
          
 
 
Fig.11.3
Fig.11.4
The next goal was to use the fragment shader to color the crystal shape, but I wasn’t 
a fan of how it ended up looking, so I decided to read more into the diferent ways 
of outputting colors with shaders. This is when I turned more heavily to Patricio 
Gonzalez Vivo’s The Book of Shaders,
5 and in particular, the chapter on “Shaping 
Functions.” I learned about GLSL ’s built-in trigonometry and math functions, which 
take in a number (or a set of numbers) and output another. I also learned about 
the mix()  function, where I could input two colors and not only get a new color 
between those two, but also individually mix the Red, Green, and Blue channels 
to make completely new colors that aren’t between the two original colors. Once 
I combined those two functions, I was able to get beautiful gradients and shapes. 
Fig.11.3 
Gradients that were created by mixing blue and yellow, and 
tweaking the Red, Green, and Blue channels at each “pixel” 
with power() , sine() , absolute() , step() , and smoothstep() . 
When I felt happy with the colors, I switched gears and started plugging in the data: 
number of faces for number of references at the bottom of the Wikipedia page, size 
for number of Wikipedia backlinks, and color for the Nobel Prize award category. 
Fig.11.4 
First attempt at the 
crystals with the data 
plugged in. 
5 Patricio Gonzalez Vivo, The Book of Shaders: https:/ /thebookofshaders.com/ 

--- PAGE 375 ---
374 
SHIRLEY
 
    
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
    
  
 
  
 
     
 
 
 
Fig.11.5Fig.11.5 
The new crystals where 
I programmatically set 
the number of faces, 
instead of hard-coding 
every shape. 
I really didn’t like this output for two reasons: 
• I was hard-coding each shape, so I only had three distinct shapes: 
a rectangle, a rectangle with a triangle on top, and a rectangle with 
a triangle on the top and bottom. This meant most of the “crystals” 
were just rectangles. 
• I also wanted one color per category for a total of six colors; so for each 
crystal I only passed in one color and programmatically manipulated that 
color with a shaping function. The resulting colors didn’t look good at all. 
It was around this time that I came across a demo for Bloom
6 (a post-processing 
efect that gives objects a glow around them), and in that example there were round, 
gem-like objects that looked quite similar to the crystals I wanted. 
When I looked at the code, I learned that it used Three.js’s 
SphereGeometry  but with the flatShading  option on, which shows each 
distinct face of a shape instead of the default smooth, round surface. This made 
me realize that in addition to being able to manipulate and mix colors to get new 
ones, I could also manipulate the settings on an existing Three.js geometry 
to get a new (and completely diferent looking) shape—very cool! So I swapped out 
the PolyhedronGeometry  with SphereGeometry , set the width and height 
segments to programmatically vary the number of faces depending on the data, 
stretched out the shape by setting the vertical scale to twice the horizontal scale, 
added jitter to the vertices so that each crystal looked a little diferent, and ended 
up with a much more interesting set of shapes: 
6 https:/ /vanruesc.github.io/postprocessing/public/demo/#bloom 

--- PAGE 376 ---
375 
MYTHS & LEGENDS
(a) )
  
  
   
     
 
 
  
  
Fig.11.6 
Fig.11.7
Fig.11.8
Fig.11.6 
The crystals with the 
new fragment shader 
code applied. 
Fig.11.7 
The crystals with the 
edges defned. 
Once I had my new shapes, I went back to my fragment shader code to apply 
what I learned about color mixing and shaping functions (Figure 11.6). 
I liked the new colors, but didn’t like that I had lost the hard edges. 
Thankfully, Matt taught me I could get the defnition back by calling 
computeFlatVertexNormals()  on the geometry and adding it to each 
“pixel” color in the fragment shader. This not only made the edges really apparent, 
but also faked a light source, making the bottom and back of the crystals appear 
darker and in shadow (Figure 11.7). 
From there, I played around with two sets of gradients: one for awards 
in the humanities (Peace, Literature, Economic Sciences), and another for 
awards in the natural sciences (Physics, Chemistry, Medicine) (Figure 11.8). 
(b 
I love how much the 
frst one looks like 
sweet potatoes, which 
is seriously my dad’s 
favorite food. (*≧▽≦) 
Fig.11.8 
Experimenting with two 
diferent color schemes 
to distinguish awards 
in the humanities and 
natural sciences. 
Two because I knew 
that I couldn't come 
up with two distinct 
gradients 

--- PAGE 377 ---
376 
SHIRLEY
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Fig.11.9
Next came the background. I created the “foor” by using a PlaneGeometry 
placed below the crystals, dividing it up into a constant number of segments 
and jittering the y-position of those segments to create a sense of uneven ground. 
I created the “sky” by placing a huge sphere around the scene with the viewer 
inside of it. I experimented with three diferent kinds of lights: hemisphere lights and 
ambient lights to give the “sky” a nice sunrise glow, and directional lights to cast 
shadows from the crystals to the “foor” (Figure 11.9 ). 
To fnish the piece, I added “stars” to represent all the men who won Nobel 
Prizes in the same time period, as well as annotations for each crystal. It was 
a fun challenge trying to add text for the annotations: I tried to create the text 
using Three.js’s TextGeometry  at frst, but the page became completely 
unresponsive because Three.js was rendering each letter as a 3D object. 
After some Google searches, I found a solution to render the text within canvas, 
create a PlaneGeometry , and use that canvas as an image texture to fll 
the PlaneGeometry —a much more performant solution! 
My favorite part of the visualization is how I decided to use the third dimension 
to represent time. The crystals are placed according to the decade the laureate 
received her award, so the closer to the front (and the viewer), the more recent the 
award. But the decades are only revealed when a user “fies up” to view the crystals 
from above; if they “walk through” the crystals at ground level, they will only see 
information about each woman. I did this because I really wanted the user to learn 
more about each laureate frst, before they “few up” for a holistic view. 
To fnish, I created a landing page with a legend for my legends (hehe), 
and managed the componentization and interaction with Vue.js. 
I was quite upset when 
I learned that there 
have been 866 male 
Nobel Laureates but 
only 53 women Nobel 
Laureates. There’s 
always a gasp of 
disbelief when I reveal 
to an audience that the 
stars are male Nobel 
Laureates, because 
there are so many 
of them compared 
to the crystals. 
Unfortunately, because 
the text is rendered 
in canvas, it is treated 
as an image and thus 
isn’t a11y (accessibility) 
compliant—something 
I only realized later on. 
Fig.11.9 
Background with a foor and sky added. 

--- PAGE 378 ---
377 
MYTHS & LEGENDS
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
Reflections 
This project was super fun, and I’m so proud that I was able to fnish it in three 
weeks—something I hadn’t been able to do since the “Travel” project. I was also 
able to teach myself Three.js and a little bit of GLSL, which I wanted to do for 
a very long time. This project was a great opportunity to use the third dimension 
and also gave me the confdence to experiment with more 3D and physical 
installation projects in the future. But most importantly, I’m so glad I chose this 
dataset of women Nobel Laureates; it has since motivated me to work with 
and highlight datasets featuring underrepresented groups. 

--- PAGE 379 ---
  
Legends 
shirleywu.studio/projects/legends 

--- PAGE 380 ---
[no text]

--- PAGE 381 ---
380 
SHIRLEY
Fig.11.11
Fig.11.12
Fig.11.11 
Recent women Nobel Laureates 
I fnd incredibly inspiring. 
Fig.11.12 
I also turned this project into washi 
tape! But because each crystal 
wasn’t distinct enough, I turned them 
into fowers instead. 

--- PAGE 382 ---
381 
MYTHS & LEGENDS
 
 
Fig.11.13
Fig.11.13 
My main goal with this project was to create a physical 
installation, and I got the opportunity when I collaborated with 
my studio-mate and illustrator-muralist-extraordinaire Alice 
Lee! It was a fun learning experience as I had to pay attention 
to details I never had to when working digitally, like physically 
organizing the pieces by prize category so we painted them 
the correct colors (top left), and then again by decade so that 
we hung them up in the right order (middle left). 

--- PAGE 383 ---
382 
FEARLESS 

--- PAGE 384 ---
383 
FEARLESS 

--- PAGE 385 ---
[no text]

--- PAGE 386 ---
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 –
An Ode to 
Cardcaptor Sakura 
NADIEH 
I’m starting to understand that the topics which make me really 
enthusiastic are quite niche topics. Not many other people know them. 
I can only hope this visual will be a joy to explore. I chose to dive into 
“Cardcaptor Sakura.” 
Cardcaptor Sakura (or CCS) is a magical-girl manga (a Japanese comic 
or graphic novel) that was released about 20 years ago and revolves 
around a kind, brave, and fearless girl called Sakura. It was the very frst 
manga I owned, and I’ve read it dozens of times. I picked up CCS because 
the cover looked like the most beautiful comic I had ever seen, and 
basically every panel within was just mind-blowingly perfect and cute. 
Even though it’s been more than 20 years since the last chapter was 
published, I’d recently learned about a new “arc” of CCS that was 
released and thus it was on my mind again. One of my favorite things 
about CCS is how beautiful each page looks. The covers of each chapter 
are tiny works of art. I wanted to investigate those covers through data 
somehow, as I had never done any kind of analysis based on image data 
before. I loved the idea of creating a visualization that abstracted the 
colors of each cover into a few colors and thought it would be a fun way 
to explore and learn. Due to copyright, I’m sadly unable to show any 
images of CCS in this book 
(╥_╥). 
NOVEMBER  DECEMBER 2017 385 FEARLESS 

--- PAGE 387 ---
386 
NADIEH
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.12.1
Data 
Fig.12.1 
Color distribution 
of the frst CCS 
chapter using a 
K-means clustering. 
Imagine a Japanese 
girl, in front of a mostly 
blue sky with clouds, 
wearing a black and 
white school uniform. 
There are 50 chapters in the original CCS manga, divided into two “arcs.” I fipped 
through the 12 complete CCS volumes to see what image was on the cover of the 
chapters. However, these chapter covers were printed in black and white. Thankfully, 
all of those chapter covers have since been published in full-color in several CCS art 
books. A quick search revealed that they were all available as a color image from the 
CCS Wiki page.
1 
Using the imager package, I loaded the images into R where each pixel was 
transformed into a multidimensional array of RGBA values. I converted this complex 
array into something more simple, having three columns (for the RGB values), 
with the number of rows being equal to the number of pixels. To fgure out which 
algorithm would cluster the data points (pixels) into decent color groups, I tried 
several things. First, I experimented with diferent clustering techniques: from the 
standard K-means, to hierarchical clustering, and even tSNE. Then I also converted 
the RGB values of each pixel into other color spaces (where colors have diferent 
“distances” to each other, which leads to diferent clustering results per color 
space), using (among others) the colorspace package in R. 
I converted the results of each test into a bar chart such as the one in Figure 
12.1 to see the color groups. Eventually, I found that using K-means together with the 
colors converted to LAB color-space visually gave the best ftting results, with the 
most distinct groupings of colors. 
A volume combines 
several chapters. 
RGBA stands for red, 
green, blue, and alpha. 
Alpha refers to the 
opacity/transparency. 
Examples of colors 
spaces are: RGB, HSL, 
HSV, and LAB. 
1 Cardcaptor Sakura Wiki: https:/ /ccsakura.fandom.com/wiki/ Artbook 

--- PAGE 388 ---
387 
FEARLESS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Fig.12.2Fig.12.2 
Color distributions of 
several K-means run 
on the same image, 
but with a diferent 
number of groups 
predetermined. 
However, one of the tricky things with K-means is fguring out exactly how many 
clusters are needed to create groups. Eventually, I settled for a method that could 
gauge this better than any of the techniques I used before: my own eyes! I created 
a graph such as Figure 12.2 for each chapter which shows the color distribution for 
three groups, up to 11. I then compared the actual cover to these groups and chose 
the one that achieved the best balance between capturing all the colors and having 
a good blend of distinct colors. The color hex codes were then saved into a JSON 
fle, along with the cluster/color percentage. (This is the percentage of the image’s 
pixels that were grouped into the corresponding color.) 
To complement this data about the chapter covers, I also wanted to gather 
information about which characters appeared in each chapter and which “card” 
was captured in which chapter. The CCS Wiki page on each chapter seemed like just 
the resource I needed, but only the frst eight chapters contained this information. 
There was nothing else to do but re-read every chapter myself and manually 
populate an Excel fle with the information I needed about characters, cards, 
and covers. 
┐(￣ヮ￣)┌ 
Precalculate “Visual” Variables 
Use the tool that is best suited for data preparation and collection work. In this case, 
I created several diferent fles with R that I needed for each of the information layers 
in the CCS visual instead of keeping all the data in one large fle, such as a separate fle 
about the colors per chapter cover, but also the chapters each character appeared 
in, the relationships between characters, and more. Doing it in R saved me having to 
add more data preparation steps and aggregations, flters, and nesting in my JavaScript 
code, which (for me) wasn’t the easiest/best place for those kinds of operations. 
CCS is about a magical 
girl, Sakura, who has 
to collect so-called 
magical “Clow Cards.” 

--- PAGE 389 ---
388 
NADIEH
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Sketch 
Figuring out the design for this project came slowly. It was more of a domino efect; 
a concrete idea for one aspect led to a vague idea for the next part of the data 
which I then explored. I started with visualizing the results of the color analysis. 
Having a cluster of small colored circles per chapter in a radial layout seemed like 
a logical and interesting option. At frst I wanted to do a semi-circle with the color 
clusters to the right and character information to the left (see the top-right page 
of Figure 12.3). However, with 50 chapters, I needed as much space as I could get. 
So I went with an “onion-layered approach”: a smaller, inner circle related to the 
characters and a bigger, outer circle related to the color clusters. These two circles 
would then be connected by lines to show which characters appeared in which 
chapters (the bottom-right page of Figure 12.3). 
I’ve always been fascinated by the CMYK dot printing process; you can see 
the separate dots when you’re looking at it up close, but move farther back and the 
bigger picture comes into view. The CMYK dot technique for a visualization about 
a printed manga seemed like a proper style, and a challenge. And a challenge it was! 
I’ll explain more about the technical difculties in the “Code” section, but the right 
page of Figure 12.4 shows some of my “how to understand CMYK” scribbles. 
Fig.12.3Fig.12.3 
Sketch of the overall 
design for the CCS 
visualization. 

--- PAGE 390 ---
389 
FEARLESS
   
 
  
 
Fig.12.4
Fig.12.5 
(a & b)
a b
Fig.12.4 
Sketch of 
trigonometric 
functions to fgure out 
CMYK dots. 
Fig.12.5 
(a & b) 
Sketch of the swirling 
lines between 
characters and 
chapters and fguring 
out tangent lines. 
a 
Figure 12.5 b shows how I handled the calculation of a tangent line to a circle for 
diferent circumstances. I needed this information for those swirly lines from Figure 
12.5 a. But even though I ended up with diferent lines in the fnal result, I was able 
to use some of these ideas to easily convert the lines to the formulas needed for the 
fnal result (which are more circular running lines). 
b 


--- PAGE 391 ---
390 
NADIEH
(b)
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
Learn to Love Math 
Having an understanding of the SVG Cubic Bézier Curve paths was of vital importance 
at the start of the project. However, to set up a function that would somewhat correctly 
make the lines fow around the inner circle, I defnitely relied on my knowledge 
of geometry. This was especially true for thinking in polar coordinates (radius and 
angle), and how lines should move from start to end point. 
As I’ve mentioned in previous projects, I strongly recommend learning the 
basics of both geometry (especially trigonometry) and statistics if you want 
to be able to shape your data visualization to whatever idea you have in mind! 
Code 
I frst focused on getting the ring of color circles on my screen. Mostly because 
I wanted to see how that CMYK idea would look as soon as possible. Thanks 
to an excellent test that Shirley made for her “Books” project
2 to distribute clusters 
of circles in a grid, making this was actually a piece of cake! But darn it, those circles 
had to become quite small to make room for all 50 chapters (Figure 12.6). I was 
starting to have my doubts if the CMYK efect would work as well in this particular 
design as I’d hoped … 
aa bb 
Fig.12.6Fig.12.6 
(a & b)(a & b) 
(a) 
All the main colors of 50 chapters, frst 
together and then clustered per chapter 
around a circle. 
2 Test Shirley created for her “Books” project: https:/ /bl.ocks.org/sxywu/570df88e66e420191d33dc5b5650aaf4 

--- PAGE 392 ---
391 
FEARLESS
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
Fig.12.8
I wasn’t going to give up without trying. I found an example3 that neatly coded 
up a CMYK dot efect as SVG patterns. I rewrote it to create a separate pattern for 
each color in my data, which resulted in a ring full of CMYK-based colored circles. 
But on closer inspection I found something I didn’t quite like. Although the circles 
on the inside looked exactly how I wanted them, they were still SVGs. So they 
had been perfectly clipped into a circle (Figure 12.7). But I wanted my CMYK dots 
to smoothly fade out, not end abruptly. Furthermore, I also wanted to play around 
with partially overlapping circles and having the colors mix even further, which 
wasn’t possible with this technique. 
Fig.12.7Fig.12.7 
Each SVG circle 
flled with a CMYK 
dot pattern, but too 
perfectly cut to a circle 
at the edges. 
I already suspected that using canvas was probably the way to go. I found two 
interesting code snippets4 that took me a good 3–4 hours to wrap my head around 
and combine them mathematically into one. [¬°-°]¬ 
Fig.12.8 
Comparing the CMYK 
transformations to the 
original group of circles. 
3 CMYK Halftone Printing by Noah Veltman: https:/ /bl.ocks.org/veltman/50a350e86de82278fb2df248499d3e2 
4 Color Halftone Filter by Patrick Matte: http:/ /www.patrickmatte.com/?p=352 and 
Canvas Halftoning by @ucnv: https:/ /gist.github.com/ucnv/249486 

--- PAGE 393 ---
392 
NADIEH
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
  Fig.12.9 a b cFig.12.9 
Eventually I got the smooth edges I was going for (with the dots getting smaller 
around the sides instead of being clipped—see the images of Figure 12.9 ). Plus, 
I was able to plot the circles on top of each other which combined the CMYK 
efects of these circles. 
I applied it to all the circles from the 50 chapters and …, the circles were 
so small that there wasn’t “enough CMYK” going on. It was often too difcult 
to actually get a feeling for the circle’s true color because it contained only 
a few CMYK dots in itself. 
o(╥﹏╥)o 
Well, that’s how (dataviz) design works; sometimes you spend hours of work 
on something that never makes the cut. I took a closer look at the original SVG 
version again, and wondered what to do about the crisp outer edges. Hmmm … 
what about adding a thick stroke? And yup, that fxed it enough for me 
┐(￣ヮ￣)┌ 
(see Figure 12.10). 
a b c 
(a,b,c)(a,b,c) 
Final canvas CMYK 
circles that have 
smooth edges (left 
images) and can 
overlap (rightmost 
image). 
Fig.12.10Fig.12.10 
Going back to the SVG 
version, but now with 
a stroke to “mask” the 
sharp edges of the 
CMYK dots a little. 

--- PAGE 394 ---
393 
FEARLESS
(b)  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.12.11 
(a,b,c,d)
a b
c d
Fig.12.11 
(a,b,c,d) 
Figuring out the SVG 
paths of the “inner 
relationship” lines. 
I thought the swirly lines between the inner and outer circles would probably 
be the second most difcult thing to tackle. So I frst completed the donut-chart-like 
inner circle where the lines would connect to. Still, I wanted to see if I could get the 
connections/relations between the characters “visually working” in the inner circle 
before I moved to the outer lines. If the inner lines didn’t work, I would have to think 
of a diferent general layout. Time to write some custom SVG paths again! Figure 12.11 
shows the progress from the simplest approach, straight lines in Figure 12.11 a, to the 
fnal nicely curved lines in Figure 12.11 d. 
I colored the lines according to the type of connection (e.g., family, love, 
friend). With the fnal result on my screen I could see that there weren’t too many 
lines in there, no visual overload. 
(๑•`ㅂ•´)ง✧ Finally, it was time to dive into those 
swirly lines connecting the chapters to the characters. 
a(a) b 
The paths in the fnal 
version are made up 
of circle segments. 
I reused code that 
I initially wrote for 
the small arcs in my 
“Books” project about 
fantasy books. 
c d 

--- PAGE 395 ---
394 
NADIEH
(a)
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
a
b
Fig.12.12 
(a & b)
The most extreme and difcult lines that I could create would run from a character 
to a chapter that’s on the other side of the circle. The line would have to swirl around 
the inner circle, without touching any of the other character’s names. I thought 
I could probably pull that of by combining two Cubic Bézier Curves. But making one 
of those curves act as you want, depending on the data, can be a hassle. And I found 
out that two was more than twice the hassle. 
(◍•﹏•) 
With such difcult paths I started out by placing small dots along the line path 
itself (the red circle in the center of Figure 12.12 a) and the anchor points (the blue, 
green, and yellow-orange circle [ignore the pink circle]). It gave me an idea of what 
“handles” I was moving around and how that afected the shape of the visible line. 
b 
Fig.12.12 
(a & b) 
a 
Placing circles on 
the SVG path anchor 
points to understand 
the line movement. 
After some manual tweaking with fxed numbers I had a shape for the longer line 
that I liked. I saved those settings and made a shorter line. I then inspected how all 
of the settings changed between the two options. This gave me hints on how to infer 
several formulas that would hopefully create nice looking lines, no matter the start 
and end points. But, like I said, that wasn’t as easy as I’d hoped. 
I don’t really want to think back on the journey that eventually led me to the 
lines I needed, but for a long, long time I kept messing it all up completely 
(see Figure 12.13). 

--- PAGE 396 ---
395 
FEARLESS
(b)
(a) (b)
(c)
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
c
b
a b
Fig.12.13 
(a,b,c)
Fig.12.14 (a & b)
aa
(a) c 
b 
a b 
Fig.12.13 
(a,b,c) 
Some lines might look 
ok, but for others the 
angle might not be 
right anymore and the 
lines would get very 
strange loops. 
Only through many, many hours of testing, drawing, thinking, and fddling did I inch 
closer to having all the lines sort of going around the center, and I was left with the 
image of Figure 12.14 a where I visualized all of the lines. Awesome, that looked like 
one big mess! There were too many lines in there to glean any insight. 
(ー_ー*; ) 
I also didn’t like those thin lines. Perhaps they should have more body? So another 
session of line formula tweaking ensued. I decided to taper the lines, similar to what 
I did in my Dragon Ball Z visualization. It felt like an improvement over the same-width 
lines I had before, but I was still not happy (Figure 12.14 b). 
Fig.12.14 (a & b) 
Thin lines at frst, but trying tapered lines 
to make it look better visually. 

--- PAGE 397 ---
396 
NADIEH
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
Fig.12.15Fig.12.15 
Setting up the 50 
chapter “pills” around 
the outside. 
I moved on from the lines for a bit to adding the chapter and volume numbers to the 
visual. The inner donut chart inspired me to try something similar for the chapters 
as well, so I created a donut chart with 50 equally sized, rounded-of sections 
(shaped like small “pills”) in which I could place a number (See a work-in-progress 
shot in Figure 12.15). I was happy with the end result and moved on. 
Next, I organized the volumes (typically a collection of four chapters) into 
a thinner donut chart which I placed outside the ring of circles. I wasn’t as happy 
with that as the chapter “pills,” but in the meantime something else was bothering 
me even more. Now that I’d placed more elements on the page and the look and feel 
of the visualization was more consistent, those inner lines didn’t appear to ft the 
design. 
ಠ_ಠ 
Accepting that the swirly lines weren’t working, I decided to try something 
radically diferent. Inspired by the way the rest of the visual looked with all of the 
added elements, my new idea was to make the lines swirl around and have them 
run along circular paths. (Think of subway map lines or pipes in a home, but then 
transformed to a radial layout.) Calculating the small array of radii and angles that 
I now needed to draw a line was a walk in the park compared to my previous SVG 
Cubic Bézier Curve shenanigans! Naturally, all that didn’t go right on the frst try, 
but thankfully I could use some of the work I’d done with the swirly lines. 
With the change of how the lines looked, I felt that the resulting lines one 
saw when hovering over a character or chapter ft perfectly with the “straight-
roundedness” of the rest. And as an added beneft, no more lines overlapped! 
(See Figure 12.16 f) 
The screenshots from 
Figure 12.16 were all 
made within two hours; 
not bad in terms 
of progress! 

--- PAGE 398 ---
397 
FEARLESS
(c)
(d)
(b)
(e)
(f )
 
 
c
d
e
f
(a)
Fig.12.16
Fig.12.16 
(a,b,c,d,e,f)
(a,b,c,d,e,f) 
Diferent steps in the 
process of creating the 
third iteration of lines. 
a
a 
b
b 
c
d 
e
f 

--- PAGE 399 ---
398 
NADIEH
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Fig.12.17 a b
Design to Maximize for Delight 
Cutting out square images from the 50 chapters and 15 characters was yet another 
to-do in this already long month, but I knew that having actual images of CCS in the 
visual would make the whole visual a lot more fun to investigate for readers. Plus, it was 
an important part of teaching people about CCS and therefore worth the efort! 
Since part of the visualization was about the covers of the chapters, and because 
I knew most people that landed on the page would probably not know about CCS, 
I wanted to incorporate some of its imagery. Thankfully, I just so happened to have 
a nice large circular area in the center! It took a while to manually “cut out” a good 
looking square image from all 50 chapter covers, but at that time I was in an airport 
and on a plane anyway. These covers would then be shown in the center when 
I was fying back 
from a great nightsomeone hovers over any of the chapters. at the “Information 
While reading through all the chapters, I took some notes of interesting story Is Beautiful Awards” 
points that I wanted to highlight. These were easy to add around the outer circle where Data Sketches 
won GOLD!! Woohoo!
with the help of the excellent d3-annotation.js library. The super handy “edit” 
mode let me drag the annotations around, see where I wanted them, and then 
hardcode and add those locations back into my code. I did end up creating my own 
lines connecting the visual with the annotations because I wanted them radiating 
outward from the center (Figure 12.17 b). 
Fig.12.17 a b 
(a & b)(a & b) 
Starting out with the 
original annotation 
lines, but eventually 
creating my own radial 
lines. 
With all these elements and layers of information in the visualization, I really needed 
a legend. I created it using Adobe Illustrator (Figure 12.18), saving me a lot of time 
over creating them through code. However (as I was getting used to for this project), 
this legend did not turn out to be the fnal result. 
I added an introduction at the top to explain the series and its main characters, 
the legend at the bottom, and with the full visualization ready to preview I shared 
it with some friends to ask for feedback. I received great suggestions on how to 
improve the (interactivity) understanding and a much better idea for the legend that 
would show the visualization with its rings and explain what each ring truly meant 
(see Figure 12.26 later in this chapter). And after all that time and efort, I fnally had 
a visualization to share with everybody! 

--- PAGE 400 ---
399 
FEARLESS
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
Fig.12.18Fig.12.18 
The frst legend 
I created in Adobe 
Illustrator, explaining 
how to read the 
visualization. 
Combine Tools 
For a very long time, I created most of my visuals completely using JavaScript code. 
However, I noticed that some parts of the visual, such as legends and annotations, 
took up both a lot of time to create and many lines of code. 
I later realized this was a silly process for visuals that ended up as static images 
anyway. For those, I now only create the “base” visualization while programming. 
Then I copy the SVG visual from my browser into a vector drawing program and add 
any surrounding annotations, pointers, titles, and other elements. 
I can still make use of the ease of a vector program even when the fnal visual 
remains interactive. For example, you can create a legend, either completely as an 
image, and place this next/within your visual (which I did for this project). Or you can 
save your legend as an SVG and load it into your visual. There are certain ways in which 
the (legend) SVG remains changeable by your JavaScript code. Which means that you 
can adjust the colors of each element separately, resize it, or even add an animation 
to it! 
So keep an open mind when deciding which tool to use; not everything has 
to be done in the tool that you use for the (interactive) visualization. Tools are typically 
not meant to do everything, but specialize in certain things. 
Reflections 
I use either Adobe 
Illustrator or Afnity 
Designer for my vector 
work, but Inkscape, 
GIMP , or Sketch are 
other options. 
This visual took me 86 hours to create, and a lot of that time went into things that 
weren’t used in the fnal visualization. I spent ±5 hours on a CMYK canvas-based 
dot efect, ±15 hours on the swirly lines, and ±6 hours on a page layout that is only 
really visible when you press “Read More.” 
Still, I’m happy with how the visualization turned out. I feel I haven’t 
quite seen a similar radial visualization like it before. And Data Sketches 
is all about experimenting with new ideas, so it’s always a joy when a project 
turns out refreshing. I hope you enjoy interacting with the visualization online, 
even if you’ve never heard of Cardcaptor Sakura before. (It’s great, btw!) 