

=== PAGE 201 ===

200 
NADEIH
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
Combine Tools 
It’s perfectly fne if you create your visual with several diferent tools. Just like people, 
fnding a unicorn tool that can do everything you need “the best way every time” 
doesn’t exist. Personally, I always start with R; I use it to read in the data, do some initial 
statistics, clean and transform the data, and make (lots of) simple plots to get a sense 
of the data. However, although R’s ggplot2 package can do a lot to visualize data, 
I need more creative control for the fnal result, and it often has to be interactive and 
on the web. I fnd that creating my visuals in JavaScript with the help of D3.js provides 
what I need. 
For static visuals, I always end with Adobe Illustrator, or other vector-based tools, 
to add some fnal touches (such as legends and annotations—things that can take 
a lot of time to add with code). Of course, not all projects lend themselves to using 
your tools of choice, but just keep in mind that you don’t need to always create 
a visual from scratch with one tool. Try to learn more tools and programs and 
acquaint yourself with the strengths and weaknesses of each. 
Reflections 
One of the main reasons why I decided to create a poster instead of an interactive 
visual came down to other time commitments. Making a static visualization 
is always much faster for me to create, even if it’s partly based on something that 
I started in D3.js. For static visuals you just don’t have to consider browser bugs, 
performance, responsive design, and interactivity! 
Preparing and working on the data scraping and cleaning took about 20 
hours of time, the ideation and sketching about three, and the coding/creating 
approximately 20–30 hours. Finishing a static visual after creating so many 
interactive ones always reminds me how much I like making printable static visuals. 
A funny thing happened though. I generally share my (personal) projects only 
on Twitter, maybe Instagram if I’m in a good mood. But I decided to also post this 
infographic on my LinkedIn account, due to most of my connections there being 
Dutch at the time. And somehow, it got picked up beyond my direct connections and 
went a little viral in the Netherlands. Totally unexpected! I thought this visual was too 
complex for that. Majorly exciting to experience though! A few hundred thousand 
views and thousands of likes later, I even had some businesses reach out to me 
to create a data visualization for them. Which was perfect timing, since I was 
ofcially a freelancer from the moment the Top 2000 fnished airing the number 
1 song at the very start of 2017. 

=== PAGE 202 ===

201 
MUSIC

=== PAGE 203 ===

 
Fig.6.12
Fig.6.14
Fig.6.13
The Top 2000 the 70s & 80 
Top2000.VisualCinnamon.com 
Fig.6.12 
The most popular 
decades in terms of 
song release year are 
the 70s and 80s. 
Fig.6.14 
With each new Top 2000, more 
songs from the 90s enter the list, 
even though the frst edition was 
aired in 1999. 
Fig.6.13 
Highlighting all of 
Prince’s songs in the 
list with a purple stroke. 

=== PAGE 204 ===

203 
MUSIC
Year of release
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
Fig.6.15
Fig.6.15 

=== PAGE 205 ===

[No text extracted - likely image-heavy page]

=== PAGE 206 ===

205 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 Data-Driven 
Revolutions 
SHIRLEY 
When Nadieh and I frst agreed on the topic “Music,” I felt quite lost. I didn’t 
know what I wanted to do, except to perhaps explore something related 
to K-Pop. But K-Pop was just too broad of a topic and I didn’t know it well 
enough (anymore) to fnd a good angle. I was lamenting this lack of an 
angle with a friend when I suddenly remembered the game Dance Dance 
Revolution (DDR). 
DDR originally started as an arcade game in Japan and eventually was 
released as video games for home consoles. Basically, the player would 
stand on a mat or a platform that served as the “controller” and step 
on any of the four arrows on the mat to “press” the controller buttons. 
A combination of arrows would appear on the TV screen in front of them, 
and the players would have to step on (or stomp on) the same arrow(s) 
on the mat, timing their steps with the arrows scrolling up the screen. 
It was a popular game across the world and a huge part of my teenage life. 
I frst came across DDR in 2001 at a friend’s house. Since there were 
no arcades with DDR anywhere near where I lived, I begged my parents 
to buy me the game. (This was easier said than done; there were absolutely 
no video games in our house at the time, so a DDR set meant not only 
buying the game itself, but also the PS2 and the mat that came along with 
it.) It took me two years to convince my parents, and the summer I got it, 
I was on it every day for hours. I was the type that played the same song on 
the same difculty over and over until I mastered it, and I played it regularly 
until I left for college fve years later. 
JANUARY 2017 MUSIC 

=== PAGE 207 ===

206 
SHIRLEY
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.6.1
Data 
With hundreds (maybe thousands) of songs, each with at least three difculty 
levels, and each level comprised of songs with diferent beats per minute (BPMs) 
and “Groove Radar” values (“Stream,” “Voltage,” “ Air,” “Freeze,” and “Chaos”— 
essentially the characteristics of the step choreographies), there was a lot of data. 
But never in my wildest dreams could I have imagined that I would fnd all the steps 
from 645 songs. DDR Freak is a website dedicated to DDR and provides (among 
many other things) “step charts”: PNG images with every step of a song laid out, 
so that fans could practice the song without having to pay for time on the machine: 
Fig.6.1 
Step chart for the DDR 
song “Midnite Blaze.” 
As soon as I saw the step chart images, I started talking to my Computer Vision 
friend about how we could potentially get the data out of that image. He started 
brainstorming but also encouraged me to email DDR Freak and ask if they had 
the raw data. I was skeptical (the site had been inactive for at least fve years) 
but I found an email for Jason, the founder of DDR Freak, and sent him a message 
without expecting a response. 
Amazingly, Jason responded 18 minutes later with a zip fle of all the songs 
he had on hand. How awesome is that?? (Thank you so much, Jason!) 
The data was saved in several diferent data formats, including .dwi (or Dance 
With Intensity, a freeware version of DDR) and .stp (DDR Freak’s own proprietary 
format). I found an explanation for the .dwi fle format online, and learned that 
0 meant no arrow, 2 represented the down arrow, 4 the left arrow, 6 the right arrow, 
and 8 the up arrow. Each number defaulted to 1/8 of a beat, but everything within 
parentheses indicated 1/16 steps, brackets indicated 1/24 steps, and so on. 
With that information, I was able to reverse-engineer the .stp fles (which 
followed the same rule but was much more reader-friendly) and wrote a Node.js 
script to parse the fle and store the steps, along with their song name and difculty 
level, in a JSON fle. 

=== PAGE 208 ===

207 
MUSIC
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.6.2
Fig.6.3
Sketch 
Because I was traveling for the majority of the project timeframe, I wanted to do 
something relatively simple. I had seen TeamLab’s Crystal Universe—an immersive 
installation where lights explode or linger or dance all around the room based on the 
input we, the participants, give it—a few weeks earlier, and was incredibly inspired 
by its beauty (Figure 6.2). 
I wanted to create something similar, where each step is a light colored by its 
arrow direction and animated based on its position in the song. I started by mapping 
the steps for each song’s two modes (single and double) and three difculty levels 
(basic, trick, maniac) on top of each other (Figure 6.3). 
To distinguish diferent modes and difculties from the next row of music, 
I went back to the music sheet and staves idea from my Hamilton project, but this 
is where I got stuck. The musical staves again didn’t do me much good, and the steps 
were spread so far apart from one line to the next that I couldn’t see the whole song 
or any interesting patterns at a glance. I wasn’t happy with the aesthetic of this 
I’ve since learned 
about “data art,” wheredetailed song view, and I also couldn’t fgure out the rest of the interface and how data is used to drive 
this song view would ft into it. the aesthetics, but 
doesn’t necessarily 
have to give any 
patterns or insights. 
Fig.6.2 
A photo of TeamLab’s 
Crystal Universe, taken 
by me at the Pace 
Gallery in Palo Alto, 
December 2016. 
Fig.6.3 
First attempt at 
replicating Crystal 
Universe with 
a DDR song. 


=== PAGE 209 ===

208 
SHIRLEY
   
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.6.4
Code 
While still stuck, I went to sleep with two goals for the interface in mind: 
1. I wanted each song to be compact so that I could quickly scan across multiple 
songs and compare them. 
2. I also wanted to use the visual metaphor of a song being “continuous” instead 
of being broken up into multiple rows like the previous version. 
I woke up the next day convinced that spirals were the answer to my problems. 
Spirals, like circles, are very compact, and a spiral is basically one long continuous 
line that I could map my steps to. 
I giddily set about looking into the math behind spirals and was super happy 
to fnd that for an Archimedean spiral (a spiral where the distance between each 
spiral branch is the same) the radius was equivalent to the angle. So I thought I could 
loop through each beat in a song while increasing the angle and radius by some 
constant number. 
Until I realized that, if I used that formula, I would end up with a spiral where the 
beats on the inner spirals would be closer together than those on the outer spirals, 
because as the radius increases, the arc length for a constant angle also increases 
(Figure 6.4). This would spread the beats further apart as the radius increases, but 
what I actually wanted was for the beats to be placed equidistantly along the length 
of the spiral. When I Googled again, I realized that the problem wasn’t as simple 
as I thought. The StackExchange answer I found had formulas with integrals and 
sigmas and symbols I haven’t had to think about in a decade. To make matters even 
harder, the answer seemed to skip steps in its derivation. I spent an hour trying 
to fgure out the steps between equations in order to understand how the fnal 
equation was derived. No luck. 
Fig.6.4 
Drawing a dot while 
increasing the angle 
and radius by some 
constant number 
(left), or drawing a dot 
whenever the radius 
was equivalent to the 
angle (right)—neither 
of which was what 
I wanted visually. 


=== PAGE 210 ===

209 
MUSIC
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
Fig.6.5
Then two miraculous things happened: 
1. I posted my plight on Twitter, and Andrew Knauft came back with his own step-
by-step derivation. Unfortunately, the derivation was still too complex for me 
to fgure out (at least, not quickly enough for this project). ∼(>_<。)＼ 
2. In a chance encounter, I struck up a conversation with front-end developer 
Isaac Kelly at a bar in San Francisco. After a few email exchanges where we 
tried to solve the problem together, he brute-forced the answer. 
Because I was already falling behind on the project deadline and running out 
of time, I took Issac’s brute-force approach instead of trying to fgure out the 
StackExchange formula. Issac’s approach was very programmatic (which defnitely 
helped me understand it quicker) and was dependent on two constant numbers: 
a really small number to increase the angle by (I ended up using 0.02), and the 
desired arc length between two beats. The program repeatedly increased the angle 
by that small number until it hit the desired arc length, and that was where the beat 
would be placed. It then remembered the new angle where the beat was placed 
and repeated the process. I adapted this code to draw the steps (represented 
as a colored circle) to the beats they belonged, and terminated the while loop 
only when the song ended and I ran out of steps to draw: 
Fig.6.5 
A DDR song visualized 
as a spiral. 
We’ve since run into 
each other at some 
art+technology 
conferences. He even 
wrote a very funny blog 
post about the whole 
experience.
1 
1 Issac Kelly, “Mark Equidistant Points on a Spiral”: https:/ /www.issackelly.com/blog/2017 /01/20/mark-equidistant-points-on-a-spiral 

=== PAGE 211 ===

210 
SHIRLEY
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
I then mapped arrow direction to color, and though I didn’t have any particular 
reasons behind each color assignment, I did want them to be distinct from each 
other: left is orange, up is red, right is green, and down is blue. I also mapped 
difculty to circle radius: I made it so that the higher the difculty, the smaller the 
circle would be. 
I drew all of these in HTML5 canvas as there were so many steps and so many 
songs, and I applied an overlay blend mode on the circles. For each song, I also 
added a legend explaining the colors and sizes and an interaction to flter by arrow 
direction and difculty (Figure 6.6). I was hoping that the flter would help me see 
some patterns, but unfortunately because there were so many steps and so many 
songs, I was too overwhelmed and wasn’t able to fnd any. 
For my fnal step, I added an expand button for each song that scaled the 
spiral by 1.5x and increased its viewport by 2x when clicked. This allowed the visitor 
to both view each spiral in more detail and to see some of the longer songs whose 
spirals were cut of. 
Reflections 
This was meant to be a 
visual pun on the fact 
that it’s harder to see 
all the steps in more 
difcult songs. (o≧∀≦o) 
Although the result 
was aesthetically 
pleasing, it was also 
very misleading since 
the overlay blend mode 
changed the colors of 
the overlapping circles. 
Overall, I’m happy with where I ended up given where I started. With the spiral, 
I can compare multiple songs, and both the big spirals (long songs) and smaller 
spirals stand out. But for the sake of compactness, I sacrifced being able to see 
at-a-glance patterns within a song. One of the aspects that make DDR so fun 
is that a song will have many sets of steps that repeat throughout; with this 
visualization, it’s hard to fnd those. I’m not sure if, given enough time, I would 
have been able to come up with a visualization that could show both the trends 
across songs as well as the patterns within songs. 
I was also unsatisfed with the performance. Even though I used HTML5 canvas 
for every song, there were so many songs that the web page rendered very slowly. 
Given more time, I would have created an overview page with a simplifed version 
of the visualization and only showed the song in detail once selected. 
Either way, my favorite part about this project wasn’t actually the process 
or what I ended up with; it was instead the kindness of strangers willing to give 
a helping hand, proving that (some) people are awesome. 
I could also see that 
some of my favorite 
DDR songs had a lot 
of steps closer 
together. No wonder 
I was so out of breath 
whenever I played 
them! 

=== PAGE 212 ===

211 
MUSIC
Fig.6.6
Fig.6.7
Fig.6.6 
”Midnight Blaze” with 
all steps (left), without 
the “basic” steps 
(middle), and without 
the “trick” steps (right). 
Fig.6.7 
My favorite bug from 
this project, where 
the spirals ended 
up looking like roses 
instead! 


=== PAGE 213 ===

 
Data-Driven Revolutions 
shirleywu.studio/projects/ddr 
Fig.6.8Fig.6.8 
The fnal visualization 
with six out of the 645 
available DDR songs. 

=== PAGE 214 ===

213 
MUSIC
Fig.6.9
Fig.6.9 
Some of the most 
complicated (or pretty!) 
looking DDR songs. 

=== PAGE 215 ===

214 
NOSTALGIA 

=== PAGE 216 ===

215 
ALGIA 

=== PAGE 217 ===

[No text extracted - likely image-heavy page]

=== PAGE 218 ===

 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 All the Fights 
in Dragon Ball Z 
NADIEH 
I had several choices for the topic of this project’s “Nostalgia” theme— 
including video games, manga, and anime—and I didn’t know which one 
would provide the most interesting dataset. I therefore scoured the web 
for all the topics I had in mind. I loved playing The Legend of Zelda on the 
Game Boy, especially “Minish Cap” and the “Oracle of Ages/Seasons” 
combo. There was something about the 2D bird’s eye view of Game Boy’s 
Zelda games that worked exceptionally well for me, whereas in 3D games 
I just kept falling of bridges and running into corners… Unfortunately 
I couldn’t fnd any interesting data. I looked at the original Cardcaptor 
Sakura (CCS) manga but also didn’t fnd enough data that I could use 
to create something elaborate. Neopets is where I frst encountered HTML 
& CSS at 14, even though I didn’t continue using any web languages until 
I saw the magic of D3.js some 12 years later. However, I found out my 
account was hacked, my pet stolen, and I wasn’t in the mood to investigate 
that further at the time. 
Eventually I turned my focus to the last subject I had in mind: Dragon Ball Z 
(DBZ). This anime was my very frst introduction to the Japanese animation 
scene, airing on Cartoon Network in the Netherlands when I was about 13 
or 14. Although I quickly turned solely to manga in general, I stayed loyal 
to the DBZ anime and loved watching it all the way to the Fusion Saga. 
(I eventually stopped watching DBZ because I was too annoyed by the 
characters Majin Buu and Gotenks 
눈_눈) 
JANUARY 2017 217 NOSTALGIA 

=== PAGE 219 ===

218 
NADIEH
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
         
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data 
While randomly going through the extensive Dragon Ball Wiki,1 I learned that Dragon 
Ball Z is very much alive despite originally airing about 20 years ago. I also learned 
that Dragon Ball Kai—a fller-free version of DBZ—aired in the United States not 
too long ago, as did Dragon Ball Super, a new series taking place right after DBZ 
chronologically. I came across the page to each DBZ saga (you can think of a saga 
as being a season or story arc) and saw a list of all the major fghts that took place 
as well as the characters involved, in order of appearance. This dataset immediately 
stuck out to me. Because DBZ is an anime that revolves around fghting, it felt 
so appropriate to map out all of the fghts that happened during the run of the show, 
including who fought whom, who were the bad guys, and what transformations were 
active (such as “Super Saiyan,” or SSJ for short). 
So I manually went through all ±17 sagas that make up the 291 episodes and 
copy-pasted the fghts with the characters into Excel. With the help of some Excel 
functions (such as LEFT , RIGHT , LEN , and FIND ), I split up the fghts into the 
separate characters involved, and after two more hours of manual cleaning, I had 
a nice list of ±200 fghts. 
Data Can Be Found in Many 
Diferent Ways 
Be open to the weird ways in which data can be found online. For this project 
there was no nice-looking, already formatted spreadsheet that I could 
download and use for my visual. Instead, it came down to manually copying 
text lists from a website into Excel. I’m glad that other people had already put 
in the efort to create this list of fghts on the DBZ Wiki! 
Next, I needed to arrange the data in a slightly diferent order. Originally each fght 
was on one row, but I needed each character per fght in one row. Because I’m more 
comfortable in R than in Excel, I created this additional dataset with a few lines 
of code in R; but I think it could also have been done in Excel. So generally, all the 
data was gathered and prepared without truly needing to write a single line of code! 
Another “data gathering” step that came up later in the process was fnding 
appropriate animated GIFs to highlight the most special moments and fghts, plus 
nice shots of the main characters for the legend. I went through hundreds of GIFs 
and images, trying to fnd some decent stuf. 
No fller for DBZ 
basically means 30% 
less episodes! 
I’m afraid that due to 
copyright reasons I’m 
unable to show any 
images of Dragon Ball Z 
in this book. 
I use Excel from time 
to time to do highly 
manual, one-of, 
data preparation. 
Seriously, it took me 
hours going through 
all the GIFs and 
images, but it was 
a lot of fun too. 
1 Dragon Ball Wiki: https:/ /dragonball.fandom.com/wiki/Main_Page 

=== PAGE 220 ===

219 
NOSTALGIA
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
a
Fig.7.1 
(a & b)
b
Design to Maximize for Delight 
I didn’t need the animated GIFs highlighting some of my favorite moments in DBZ 
to show the fght data. However, I felt that they made a very big diference in how 
much fun it would be to look through the whole visual, as it draws the viewer in more. 
These images also show a sneak peek of DBZ to those that have never seen or heard 
of it before. 
It’s important to keep your viewer engaged, especially with more complex visuals. 
Small touches—such as animated GIFs, images, weird design styles and fourishes, 
and interesting legends—can help with that. But don’t go too far; these should be small 
additions to your visual should not take center stage! 
Sketch 
The ability of strong 
characters to fy in DBZ 
is an important part 
of the show. 
a 
After fnding the DBZ fght info on the Wiki, I came up with the concept to place 
each fght on a line, one after another, where each saga in the series would 
have its own column. Lines would be drawn through the fghts of each character, 
as if that person was fying from fght to fght. Figure 7.1 a shows my very frst sketch 
of the idea, while Figure 7.1 b shows another sketch where I started looking into the 
details a bit more. As I already knew that I would have to create the formulas for the 
“swooshing” SVG paths myself, I tried to see where to place the anchor points of the 
SVG Quadratic Bézier Curves
2 (which makes the lines swoosh outward). 
Fig.7.1 
(a & b) 
Sketches showing the 
general layout of the 
fghts across sagas and 
connecting characters 
between fghts. 
b 
2 SVG Quadratic Bézier Curve Example: http:/ /blogs.sitepointstatic.com/examples/tech/svg-curves/quadratic-curve.html 

=== PAGE 221 ===

220 
NADIEH
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Fig.7.2
a b
A while later, having already programmed the basic layout of the fghts, I realized 
that I didn’t like the lines to have only one level of thickness. It was making the overall 
visual look a little plain, and it didn’t convey the more dynamic nature of the fghts. 
So I set out to create a shape that would look like a line of varying levels of thickness, 
as if pressure was being used on a pen that draws the lines. I created another simple 
sketch (Figure 7.2) that had the shape that I was looking for. Only after I drew 
my desired end state of a shape was I able to fgure out the SVG path formula that 
would be needed to recreate it. 
Fig.7.2 
Figuring out how 
to create a shape 
of varying thickness 
in SVG path 
coordinates. 
One part that I was constantly struggling with, and have struggled with practically 
every project, is the overall layout. What fonts would ft this design? How should 
I place the intro text and any legends? How can I make the page as a whole look 
interesting? I sketched out a general idea for the overall layout (Figure 7.3) and 
I have to admit, as usual, the end result wasn’t quite as visually pleasing as I would 
have hoped, but I was reasonably OK with it this time. 
For this project the sketches were very basic. It was really about getting the 
abstract shapes on paper. Any form of design was completed while I was already 
programming with the actual data. 
a b 
Fig.7.3Fig.7.3 
(a & b)(a & b) 
Figuring out the layout 
of the tooltip. Drawing 
the layout of the intro 
section. 

=== PAGE 222 ===

221 
NOSTALGIA
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
     
  
 
a b
Fig.7.4 
(a & b)
Code 
As per my sketches, I wanted to represent every fghter in a battle with a circle 
and then have these circles partly overlapping. Each saga would be placed in its 
own column to make the distinction between diferent story arcs more apparent. 
With some simple geometry that was achieved relatively quickly (Figure 7.4 a). 
I then colored the circles diferently for each character, taking inspiration from 
the character’s appearance. As another level of detail, I added extra rings around 
the main circle to reveal possible “transformation levels,” such as Super Saiyan 
(SSJ). As the number of unique transformations throughout the anime was 
manageable, I wrote a bunch of if-elseif-else statements to set the number 
of outer rings based on the specifc transformation’s name (Figure 7.4 b). 
a b 
Fig.7.4 
(a & b) 
The basic outline of the 
visual was achieved 
in relatively little time. 

=== PAGE 223 ===

222 
NADIEH
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  Fig.7.5 
(a,b,c)
a
b
c
Fig.7.5 
(a,b,c) 
Slowly building up the 
complexity of the lines. 
Next came the custom SVG paths that connected all the fghts from one character, 
using SVG Quadratic Bézier Curves to create a “swoosh” efect that made it look 
more visually pleasing. Of course, I didn’t start by creating the complete path; 
I built things up incrementally, adding more and more of the required complexity 
bit by bit (Figure 7.5). I started with straight lines from fght to fght, adding curves 
to the lines, cutting the lines between sagas for the minor characters to reduce 
clutter, and so on. 
a 
b 
c 
That did make all the swooshes look rather similar, creating a bit of a boring result 
and the occasional overlap of lines. I therefore made the swooshes move farther 
outward if the distance between two consecutive fghts was larger, and added a bit 
of randomness in the amount of distance on top of that so no swoosh would overlap 
(Figure 7.6). 

=== PAGE 224 ===

223 
NOSTALGIA
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
Fig.7.6
Fig.7.7
I liked the end result more with the added randomness, but in my mind the 
swooshing lines had diferent widths, from thin at the fght circles to broad during 
the bend in between fghts. I therefore turned the line into a shape by adding 
another piece to the SVG path that would run back from bottom to top, creating 
a closed loop with slightly diferent values for the amount of swoosh, which I could 
fll with a color (Figure 7.7). 
Fig.7.6 
I obviously had errors 
in my line math here… 
Fig.7.7 
Filling my new shapes 
showed that I wasn’t 
doing the path 
calculations 
totally correct. 

=== PAGE 225 ===

224 
NADIEH
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
Fig.7.8
(a & b)
૭
Thinking about math and hand-crafted SVG paths yet again was an interesting 
exercise. And thankfully, it gave me the result that I was looking for. Figure 7.8 
shows the comparison of a simple stroked line versus the varying thickness shape. 
Personally, I fnd the latter looking a lot more visually appealing. 
Fig.7.8 
(a & b) 
Comparing before and 
after, going from line to 
varying thickness path. 
With about 200 fghts to include, this visual is quite long; in fact, it’s about six-and-
a-half times as long as it is wide. This will never ft on any  screen. When I showed the 
visual to Shirley, she said that she wanted to know what section she was looking at 
with respect to the whole and suggested I add a mini map with a full overview that 
would always be visible. I thought it was a great idea, but I also dreaded building 
it, due to its complexity to program. 
and slowly built up the mini map (Figure 7.9) 
Nevertheless, one a Saturday in January I sat behind my laptop for hours 
(ò_óˇ)૭. 

=== PAGE 226 ===

225 
NOSTALGIA
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
Fig.7.9
Fig.7.9 
Adding a mini map 
of the total visual on 
the right of the page, 
showing the viewer 
where they are in 
relation to the whole. 
I also got another great suggestion from a friend to make it easier to distinguish 
the good guys from the bad guys. In the new version all the good guys have their 
lines swooshing on the left, whereas the bad guys are on the right. This made 
it possible to see for example that the character Vegeta (in blue) starts out 
as a main antagonist, but, after moving around a bit, mostly turns to the good side. 
And those were just the static parts of the visual! I also added a transition 
efect that occurs when you hover over a fght (Figure 7.10 ). A white circle that 
appears as a background, with everything getting bigger and the circles moving 
outward. The only downside is that it’s quite performance heavy, because so many 
paths and circles change opacity. (In retrospect, this is another perfect example 
of a visual that I should’ve made in canvas instead of SVG due to the number 
of changing elements, but I didn’t have enough canvas knowledge at the time 
to pull it of.) 
Apart from the female 
Android 18 soundly 
defeating some of the 
good guys during a few 
fghts, it’s basically only 
guys that are fghting. 
Maybe Vegeta didn’t 
turn into a “good guy” 
for the right reasons at 
frst, until he sacrifced 
himself in the Majin Buu 
saga; *cue tears.* 

=== PAGE 227 ===

226 
NADIEH
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
Fig.7.10 
(a & b)
b
Finally, I added a lot of small details that only DBZ fans would likely notice. 
For example, I turned the animated GIFs into links that led to the exact point Pretty proud of those 
links! (^.∼)in YouTube videos of the episode. I also replaced the GIFs with static images for 
those viewing in slower-performing browsers or on mobile. I annotated every fght 
manually to explain why it was an important fght, or what occurred. I can say 
that I gave it my all, and in general it’s the attention to detail that can make a true 
diference overall! 
(๑•`ㅂ•´)ง✧ 
Fig.7.10 
(a & b) 
The transition that 
makes the fght more 
visible when you hover 
over it. 
aa 
b 

=== PAGE 228 ===

227 
NOSTALGIA
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
Reflections 
When I started this project I also went into freelancing full time, and this project 
was the frst one where I truly tracked my hours with a tool. Compared to the 
frst six projects, this one felt like it took much more time. The fnal verdict came 
in at—drumroll—75 hours of time spent on this visual. 
(╥﹏╥) Not something that 
is sustainable to keep up next to my new full time job… 
However, it was great fun to dive into a topic I hadn’t really thought about 
for 15 years. It gave me a lot of enthusiasm to try and turn it into something worth 
looking at and informative. And although I usually shy away from the negativity 
found on Reddit, I had some interesting and fun discussions on the insights that 
we fgured out about Dragon Ball Z after I was notifed that someone shared 
my project in a DBZ subreddit. 
This was exactly the kind of reaction I was 
hoping for: making true fans see something 
they’d never realized. 
Plus, I started 
watching Dragon Ball 
Super, which is a real 
nostalgia trip every 
episode. 

=== PAGE 229 ===

 
Fig.7.11
All the Fights in Dragon Ball Z 
DragonBallZ.VisualCinnamon.com 
Fig.7.11 

=== PAGE 230 ===

229 
NOSTALGIA
Fig.7.12
Fig.7.13
Fig.7.12 
Showing the fghts from one of the 
best sagas in the anime, the Frieza 
Saga, with epic fnal fghts between 
(Super Saiyan) Goku (orange line 
along the left), and Frieza (lilac line 
arcing along the right side). 
Fig.7.13 
Hovering over a specifc fght makes it bigger with 
all the circles separated. A tooltip appears that 
names the characters involved and shows possible 
other interesting facts about the fght. 

=== PAGE 231 ===

230 
NADIEH
Fig.7.14
Fig.7.15
Fig.7.14 
Strange things happened during the later 
sagas, with characters fusing together 
to become (temporarily) a new, and 
stronger, character. 
Fig.7.15 
Hovering over the biggest fght of the 
series, with almost all the good guys 
fghting against 7 mini versions of the 
main antagonist. 

=== PAGE 232 ===

231 
NOSTALGIA
Fig.7.16
Fig.7.16 
Another big fght with many good 
guys trying to beat a new antagonist 

=== PAGE 233 ===

[No text extracted - likely image-heavy page]

=== PAGE 234 ===

233
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Most Popular 
of Them All 
SHIRLEY 
Alright, I’ll be honest; I conned Nadieh into doing “Nostalgia” just 
so I could fnally do a project exploring the Harry Potter universe. 
The Harry Potter book series (and Toy Story) will always have a special 
place in my heart: when the frst movie came out, I was eleven years old 
and eagerly waiting for my Hogwarts letter. I’m the same age as actors 
Emma Watson and Daniel Radclife, who played Hermione Granger and 
Harry Potter, respectively. When the end credits rolled for the fnal movie 
in 2011, I had the distinct feeling that my childhood had ended. 
Having said all that (sentimental stuf), I still went through a few diferent 
potential angles before settling on my fnal idea. At frst, I wanted to do 
something on Harry Potter and the Cursed Child, but realized there were 
probably copyright issues with the script. I then bought a Marauder’s Map 
hoping to visualize that somehow, but got stuck trying to fgure out what 
kind of data I could extract from it. 
Then one day, I suddenly remembered my original “Books” idea: to use 
Harry Potter fanfction as a proxy for fan reactions to the movies and books. 
JANUARY 2017 NOSTALGIA 

=== PAGE 235 ===

234 
SHIRLEY
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.7.1
Data 
Fig.7.1 
Logging some statistics 
to Terminal. 
To create the dataset, I decided to scrape HarryPotterFanfction.com  because 
of its rich and Harry Potter specifc metadata: in addition to categorizing by genres 
and ratings like many other fanfction sites, it also organizes content by eras 
(“Hogwarts,” “post-Hogwarts,” “Marauders,” “New Generation,” etc.) and 
character pairings. 
Like my “Movies” project, I used the Node.js http module to request for each 
page, but I also decided to use html2json to turn the page responses into JSON. 
I did this because with the “Movies” page responses I only needed to grab the ID 
of each movie, so I only had to write one regular expression. But for this project, 
I wanted to grab a lot of metadata and I didn’t want to write regular expressions for 
all of them. With the HTML response converted to JSON, I only had to write a small 
function to loop through the children objects for each story and fnd the metadata 
I wanted (though I still had to do some work cleaning up the raw strings). 
Because the website would only give me 25 stories per page, I had to loop 
through and request approximately 3,300 pages. I was worried that the server 
would time me out for making so many requests at once, but because I made those 
requests synchronously (asking for the next page only after the current page had 
responded and I had completely parsed through it), there were just enough seconds 
between each page request that I never had any issues. 
When I had all the data, I wanted to get a sense of it by logging some statistics 
to Terminal, the command line interface for Mac. I looked primarily at the publication 
years (Harry Potter fanfction spiked in 2007 when the fnal book and ffth movie 
came out, but has been dwindling signifcantly ever since), and the most popular 
pairings (unsurprisingly, Harry/Ginny followed by James/Lily). I also looked at which 
characters appeared the most often in these stories (Harry was the most popular, 
followed by Hermione in second, the author’s made-up “Original Character” in third, 
and Ron in fourth—which really says something about Ron’s lack of popularity). 
I had originally tried to log statistics to Terminal as a quicker way to analyze 
data (as opposed to building visualizations from scratch to test my hypotheses, 
like I did with my previous projects), but found that it didn’t work out too well for 
me. My knowledge was limited to logging the min/max and some medians, and 
though they gave me a basic understanding of the data, they were very superfcial 
and didn’t help me fnd the deeper, more interesting insights I was seeking. And 
though I knew there were many more sophisticated approaches out there, I didn’t 
know when or how to use them, so I decided to move onto the sketch section. 
I usually try to fnd the 
simplest and quickest 
way to gather a static 
dataset because I know 
I don’t have to worry 
about performance, 
but this time that 
laziness actually paid 
of ✧ 


=== PAGE 236 ===

235 
NOSTALGIA
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
Fig.7.2
Sketch 
I decided to start my brainstorming by writing down all the metadata I had. From 
there, I identifed genres, eras, and pairings as potentially interesting metadata 
that might correlate with a story’s number of reviews, which I used to measure its 
popularity and “success.” I also jotted down some questions for the data: which 
pairings were the most popular, and which other pairings did they usually appear 
with? Who did a character get paired with the most? 
My frst idea was to create a timeline of stories for each character and denote 
pairings for that character on top of the timeline. But it was around that time that 
The Pudding, a digital publication dedicated to visual and data-driven journalism, 
came out with a piece called “The Shape of Slavery”
1 (Figure 7.2). I liked how they 
used both the size and color of the dots on a map to encode two related dimensions 
(the size of Black population and their percent of total population). I was also visually 
inspired by the sequential color scale they used, which ranged from a deep blue 
to magenta to orange to yellow on a navy background. 
Fig.7.2 
“The Shape of Slavery,” 
a visual essay from 
The Pudding. 
So, inspired by their visualization, I decided to give the dots a try. Since there were 
roughly 80,000 stories on HarryPotterFanfction.com, I decided t o have each dot 
represent up to 100 stories, color the dots by the average number of reviews (and 
thus the popularity) for those 100 stories, and place those dots over a timeline. I was 
keen on using a timeline because in my data exploration I noticed that there were 
defnite spikes and declines in the number of stories across the years, and I knew 
a timeline would give good context. To place the dots, I grouped stories by the 
month of their publication (which determined their x-position), then stacked each 
set of 100 stories on top of each other. It ended up looking like a histogram made 
up of dots (Figure 7.3). 
1 “The Shape of Slavery” data visualization by The Pudding: https:/ /pudding.cool/2017 /01/shape-of-slavery/ 

=== PAGE 237 ===

236 
SHIRLEY
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
Fig.7.3
Fig.7.4
Fig.7.3 
A timeline of 
published stories 
To get a sense of character pairings, I also sketched a matrix of the top fve most 
popular characters along with their partners and placed all the stories at the 
intersection of those pairings (Figure 7.4, right). 
Fig.7.4 
Sometimes my 
sketches are really 
simple, just jotting 
down some ideas (left), 
and the matrix idea 
implemented (right). 
I quite liked the timeline. I could immediately see overall trends, including when the 
most stories were published and when those stories had the most reviews, which 
really showed when Harry Potter and the fandom peaked. I had mixed feelings about 
the matrix, though; on one hand, I liked being able to see who a character was paired 
with and in how many stories. On the other hand, I didn’t like how much space the 
matrix took and how it mirrored itself across the diagonal and thus had redundant 
information (a drawback of matrices). 
I ultimately decided to keep the timeline, but removed the matrix. With that 
decision, I wasn’t sure how to move forward with the visuals I had and what angle 
I wanted to approach the data from. It was around that (uncertain) time that I hung 
out with my friends RJ Andrews and Catherine Madden for an afternoon, and two 
beautiful things came out of that day. 
First, while showing them screenshots of my progress, RJ noticed my timeline 
of Draco/Hermione was stacked on top of Ron/Hermione (Figure 7.5). He excitedly 
pointed out that one pairing was canon (Ron/Hermione, ofcial in the books) and 
the other was non-canon (Draco/Hermione, a fan pairing), yet the non-canon 
had more stories. And thus we were able to narrow in on an interesting angle: how 
do canon and non-canon relationships compare in popularity? I re-thought 
all of my visuals around that question. 
Looking back now, 
I do like how I varied 
the size of the row/ 
columns for less 
popular characters 
so that the matrix 
didn’t take up as 
much room. 

=== PAGE 238 ===

237 
NOSTALGIA
 
 
 
      
 
 
Fig.7.5
Fig.7.6
Fig.7.7
Fig.7.5 
Timeline of Hermione/ 
Draco and Hermione/ 
Ron pairings. 
Fig.7.6 
Sketch of idea 
comparing canon and 
non-canon pairings. 
Fig.7.7 
Catherine’s gorgeous 
illustrations of Harry 
Potter characters. 
One of the main things I decided to do was visually separate canon versus non-
canon pairings using color: I chose pink for canon and purple for non-canon. I chose 
warmer colors since, to me, they represented relationships more, and I always loved 
the look of pink and purple togethe r. Since I wanted to map those colors to the 
number of reviews, I called chroma.js’s scale function with an array of colors 
chroma.js is an 
amazingly handy libraryto create a gradient that traveled through all of them. for working with color. 
And in that same afternoon, Catherine ofered to draw the Harry Potter 
characters I needed in my visualization (Figure 7.7). Her illustrations really added 
another dimension of aesthetic and polish to the project, and I still can’t thank 
Catherine enough for these beautiful icons. (* ˊᗜˋ*)/ 


=== PAGE 239 ===

238 
SHIRLEY
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
Code 
For this project, the hard part was really in the ideation; the coding was pretty 
straightforward. Once I sketched out the layout I liked, I got back to my timeline 
and added book release dates, flm dates, and GIFs for context: 
Fig.7.8Fig.7.8 
Timeline with book 
dates (flled circle), 
flm dates (white 
circle), and GIFs for 
context (blurred for 
copyright reasons). 
And immediately, some interesting things jumped out: fanfction really spiked 
in number between the publication of the sixth and seventh books (2005 and 
2007 respectively) and also during May 2006 (I still haven’t fgured out why that 
month is signifcant). There were also spikes before and after a book or movie 
release and spikes during the winter holidays (presumably because people had 
more time to relax and write stories). 
Next, I started looking into how I wanted to depict multiple pairings for 
a character. I started by overlapping a line chart for each pairing on top of each 
other. Unfortunately, the lines were very thin and hard to distinguish from each other, 
so I tried flling them to a baseline to make them appear more solid and hopefully 
easier to distinguish (Figure 7.9). I used D3.js’s area module to accomplish this. 
But again, the area charts, while pretty, were still hard to read at a glance. 
I then tried stacking the area charts, which was only slightly easier to read; the 
pairings with the least stories blended into the others for most of the months. 
To try and mitigate this, I played around with a few of the curve options in D3.js 
and I ultimately decided on d3.curveStep , which had its downsides (when the 
lines are too close together, it’s hard to tell where one ends and the next starts), 
but I still liked it the most because of how clean it looked (Figure 7.10). 
Once the pairings timeline was done, I turned my attention to visualizing the 
genres for each pairing. I was curious to see if specifc pairings leaned more heavily 
towards specifc genres, and it turned out that they did. For example, Ron/Hermione 
stories tended to lean more towards drama, fuf, and humor, while top Draco/ 
Hermione genres were drama and angst, with two or three times more in the 
horror/dark genre than all of Hermione’s other pairings. James/Lily’s top genre 
was humor, followed closely by drama, and Harry/Ginny’s top genres were drama 
and action/adventure. 
To show this, I initially considered displaying the cumulative numbers 
of stories for each genre, colored and placed according to how “dark and serious” 
or “light and fufy” it was. I was also interested in seeing if specifc genres rose or fell 
because of occurrences in the books or flms, so I initially had plans to do a timeline 
along with a horizontal spectrum of the darkness/lightness of genres. I ended 
up scrapping that idea though, because I couldn’t quite fgure out how to quantify 
the darkness/lightness of a genre on a continuous spectrum (how much lighter was 
humor than drama, for example), and kept only the timeline (Figure 7.11). 
d3.area() works 
by passing it a set 
of points, and it draws 
a line between all of the 
points and flls the area 
below the lines down 
to the baseline. 
By default, D3.js 
connects an array 
of points with just 
a straight line, but 
we can give it 
additional options 
to draw the line with 
diferent types of 
curves, which may 
help distinguish the 
lines that are closer 
together 

=== PAGE 240 ===

239 
NOSTALGIA
Fig.7.9
Fig.7.10
Fig.7.11
Fig.7.9 
Timeline with pairings as 
area charts overlapping 
each other. 
Fig.7.10 
Timeline with pairings 
as area charts stacked 
on top of each other. 
Fig.7.11 
Genres organized into timelines. 

=== PAGE 241 ===

240 
SHIRLEY
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
I lined the genre timelines up with the pairing timeline and used a canvas element 
to color each block by number of story reviews (I converted my original dots into 
blocks to ft in the step area chart I ended up creating). I added a legend above the 
timelines to map the color gradient back to the number of reviews. I also added 
a hover interaction for each block of stories to show the titles, authors, and number 
of reviews for the stories within that block: 
Fig.7.12Fig.7.12 
Final visualization for 
each pairing. 
Finally, I put in the graph of characters linked by their pairings and had it double 
as navigation for selecting and exploring each character (Figure 7.13). It defaults 
to Hermione, who has the most romance stories with the most suitors. (o≧∀≦)o 
Fig.7.13Fig.7.13 
Graph of the 
characters, linked by 
their relationships. 

=== PAGE 242 ===

241 
NOSTALGIA
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
Reflections 
I really like the overall look of the project (Catherine’s character illustrations really 
added to the aesthetics of the visualization), but I have mixed feelings about the fact 
that every visual is some form of a timeline. I really wonder if I should have changed 
up the visuals to break up the monotony. I’m also dissatisfed that though I was able 
to eventually see some interesting trends between genres and pairings, that I didn’t 
have the time to annotate those fndings. 
Despite all that, I’m happiest about the fact that I managed to do this whole 
piece with gradients of only two colors: pink and purple. Generally, I’m quite 
over-reliant on color in my visuals and wanted to try something more subtle 
in comparison, and I feel I was quite successful on that front! 

=== PAGE 243 ===

 
Fig.7.14
The Most Popular of Them All 
shirleywu.studio/projects/hpf 
Fig.7.14 
Selecting a character 
in the graph switches 
the visualization to 
center around that 
character instead. 

=== PAGE 244 ===

243 
NOSTALGIA


=== PAGE 245 ===

244 
SHIRLEY


=== PAGE 246 ===

245 
NOSTALGIA


=== PAGE 247 ===

246 
NATURE 

=== PAGE 248 ===

247 
TURE 

=== PAGE 249 ===

[No text extracted - likely image-heavy page]

=== PAGE 250 ===

249
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
Marble 
Butterflies 
NADIEH 
Nature—what a lovely theme. I thought about what defnes nature for 
me; it makes me think of evolution and the random mutations that lead 
to adaptations to the environment. This in turn reminded me of generative 
art and the semi-randomness which often guides those pieces of art. 
I’ve always loved generative art and this topic seemed like a perfect 
opportunity to give it a try. After spending a lot of time on my previous 
visual, I set a goal to fnish this one within 20 hours to force myself 
to deliver within a reasonable number of hours. 
FEBRUARY 2017 NATURE 