=== PAGE 251 ===
HEIDAN
052
Data
To start, I needed a subject to guide the generative art concept. The frst things
I was drawn to were fowers, but I couldn’t fnd a single dataset about fowers that
contained information such as the main color, average number of petals, blooming
period, etc. I only came across images of fowers to be used for image processing
training, or taxonomy lists (in other words, lists that classify fowers into specifc
groups, families, and species). I therefore turned my attention to butterfies, for Don’t ask my boyfriend
which I also have a fascination. However, I encountered the same problem here; how many times he’s
had to wait for me on
I only came across taxonomy lists.
vacations while I was
The best dataset that I was able to fnd, I kid you not, came from the website trying to perfectly
capture a butterfy.
“Gardens with Wings.”1 It had a section that divided butterfies by main colors, wing
shape, size, and species (Figure 8.1). I felt that scraping the site was more trouble
than the manual approach, so I just copy-pasted information that I needed from
each page into an Excel fle, resulting in a list of 86 diferent butterfies.
FFiigg..88..11
The diferent options
you have to search
for butterfies on the
website “Gardens
with Wings.” Website
design, usability,
and UX – Fred Miller;
website data and
project management –
Patty Bigner.
Data Can Be Found in Many
Diferent Ways
Just like my previous project about Dragon Ball Z, this one also came down to gathering
the data totally manually after I had given up hope to fnd a more “proper” already
structured dataset.
1 Gardens with Wings: http://gardenswithwings.com/

=== PAGE 252 ===
251
NATURE
Sketch
Once I fgured out the “butterfy and generative art” angle, it seemed most fun
to me to mimic a butterfy’s path across the screen. They always seem to fy quite
randomly and change direction quite suddenly (and that was it, really, the full
idea! (•ω•)).
At frst I thought about using the diferent path options to build up the
butterfy’s route; for example, the Skipper butterfy’s path would travel in straight
lines, and Swallowtails would be arcs. I tried sketching out this idea, but then quickly
switched to coding it instead. No sketch could capture the delicateness of the lines
I had in mind. I wrote down several questions or ideas I wanted to keep in mind while
coding, such as “Should a line (e.g. butterfy) quit after a certain time?”
FFiigg..88..22
This “sketch” with
questions to keep in
mind is what I used to
fgure out how to draw
the butterfy lines.
Code
I knew there would be many paths going all across the screen at once with
no interactivity. So for this project, I fnally did it right and decided to start building
the visual with canvas instead of D3.js. For my very frst attempt I just wanted the For a short explanation
simplest thing on the screen, which in my mind was representing the butterfies with of canvas, please see
“Technology & Tools”
random straight paths, switching to a diferent direction every so often (Figure 8.3).
at the beginning
Well, that looked absolutely dreadful! (⊙_⊙) This taught me that making of the book.
random things look beautiful is difcult (and I developed even more respect for
people like generative artists Jared Tarbell and Anders Hof).
I started from a generative-like example2 I created about a year before for
my butterfies, which in itself was based on a demo from Sketch.js that shows
a stream of circles bursting from a line moving across the shape of an infnity
symbol (∞).
2 Color blending—infnity showcase: http://bl.ocks.org/nbremer/cbf61944aeb3204d3e4986ea645 afc2b

=== PAGE 253 ===
HEIDAN
252
FFiigg..88..33
Very frst result on
my screen, using only
straight lines.
The horrible screenshot in Figure 8.3 showed me that I would probably need
some smoothing of the curves. And that’s when I found a tutorial on Anders Hof’s
site3 about creating nicely curved lines through a set of points and then slightly
jittering them. It looked absolutely amazing, and I immediately knew I wanted
to try something similar.
Thankfully, I could start from the code of a Stack Overfow question that draws
a so-called curved spline through a set of points, in essence smoothing out the
original line and taking of any edges. In Figure 8.4 you can see some of my earliest
tests, frst just getting a smooth curve and next starting to gently jitter the path
of the butterfies on each redraw to get a more random looking path. Once I also
dropped the opacity a lot and got to the smoky bottom line in Figure 8.4, I fnally
felt that this could turn out ok after all. (ﾉ◕ヮ◕)ﾉ*:・ﾟ✧
FFiigg..88..44 aa bb cc dd
((aa,,bb,,cc,,dd))
Slowly working towards
random, smoky looking
butterfy paths.
1 Anders Hof “Sand Spline”: https://inconvergent.net/generative/sand-spline/

=== PAGE 254 ===
253
NATURE
For ease, I let all my paths begin from the center and move outward. I started
to add some rules based on my actual butterfy data. Each frame, a few butterfies
are created, randomly picked from the dataset of ±50 butterfies. The color of the I fltered out brown-
butterfy path is defned by the main color of the butterfy. However, to get more colored butterfies
because I didn’t like the
diversity I used the Tinycolor.js library to pick randomly between fve very
color on the screen.
similar colors. The opacity and thickness of the path, and the way a butterfy futters
across the screen, is governed by the butterfy’s wingspan, which I split into “small,”
“medium,” and “large” categories. Naturally, larger butterfies have thicker paths.
FFiigg..88..55
Butterfy-based random paths
starting from the center that get
jittered on each redraw.

=== PAGE 255 ===
HEIDAN
452
I then turned to the paths themselves. In my initial setup, the paths were quite
straight. A butterfy would dash over the screen never to be seen again. To better
mimic a butterfy, I started to make the paths more curved. However, it took some
efort to make the efect look natural. Once a butterfy curved to one side, it would
have to futter for a while before curving in a diferent direction, versus quickly
jumping from one direction to the next.
FFiigg..88..66 aa bb
((aa,,bb,,cc,,dd))
cc dd
Drawing paths only in solid lines seemed a bit boring, so I started playing around
with diferent types of paths. The smallest butterfies got a dotted line. One
particular species, the Skippers, was drawn with larger circles across the path
instead of a solid line. I did have to experiment a lot to fgure out some decent
settings for the random number generators, because jittering a set of circles
around would eventually result in a very thick blobby line.
Things were starting to look better and more diverse now. I played around
with diferent bubble efects and I quite like the “scatter” approach in Figure 8.8.

=== PAGE 256 ===
255
NATURE
FFiigg..88..77
Clearly, I had a bug in my code when
creating the new circle based paths!
FFiigg..88..88
One of my favorite results, although
this efect wouldn’t remain looking
good when the code was running for
more than a few seconds.

=== PAGE 257 ===
HEIDAN
652
Design with Code
Although there’s always an element of “designing with code” in my projects, this one,
like the “Royal Constellations” project, came down to designing the whole visual with
code. My sketch only illustrated my idea vaguely; I just couldn’t quite capture what I had
in mind. Figure 8.3 doesn’t indicate that this would ever turn into something beautiful.
But by keeping an eye open for inspiration from others, and continuing to iterate and
play with the code, I ended up with a visual that I was pleased with.
For fun I added the hexagon and circle of our Data Sketches’ logo in the center and
played around with placing a butterfy-like shape in the middle, but it (naturally…)
took more time to fgure out than expected 눈_눈 (about 3–4 hours).
FFiigg..88..99
Having the paths
start from outside the
screen and adding a
hexagon and circle
(from the Data
Sketches’ logo)
in the center.
Using the openType.js library I could recreate a font as a canvas path to spell I called it “Marble
out the name of the piece; “Marble Butterfies” (Figure 8.10). And then I could also Butterfies” because
the smoky lines across
wiggle the letters around to get a less clean look to ft better with the overall style.
the screen remind me
After what seemed like endless tweaking of the path’s settings to get better of patterns in marble.
looking results, I checked out my timing app and saw that I’d reached 19:45 hours for
this project, so it was time to fnish and “ship it” to reach my goal of staying under These write-ups also
20 hours. take an additional few
hours!

=== PAGE 258 ===
257
NATURE
FFiigg..88..1100 One thing I really like about this piece is that due to the randomness, every version
that anyone opens will be a completely unique piece of data art!
Adding a central
butterfy shape and
the title of the project
in wiggled letters
as a fnal touch.
Reflections
It was quite fun not to have to create a visual that needed to be “understood” for
a change. I was free to just experiment and kept the parts that looked nice. In the
future I would defnitely like to continue investigating the more artful or generative
side of dataviz.

=== PAGE 259 ===
Marble Butterflies
MarbleButterfies.VisualCinnamon.com
FFiigg..88..1111
This screenshot shows
a version that was
taken about a minute
before the one on the
right page.
FFiigg..88..1122

=== PAGE 260 ===
259
NATURE
FFiigg..88..1133

=== PAGE 261 ===
(no text extracted)

=== PAGE 262 ===
261
Send Me Love
SHIRLEY
When we frst decided on the topic of “Nature,” I wanted to do something
with the BBC’s Planet Earth 2. I even started gathering data for the frst
episode, jotting down which animals appeared when, but it didn’t go any
further than that. (I really wasn’t excited enough about the idea for the
amount of manual data entry it required.)
More than a year later, I had fnished a piece for the San Francisco Museum
of Modern Art (SFMOMA) that I thought could maybe double for Data
Sketches. I have to admit it’s still sort of cheating; the data isn’t about
nature, it’s about texts sent to SFMOMA. But I looked at individuals’ texts
and their interactions with SFMOMA, so it could ft under human nature
(*≧∇≦). I’m very thankful that Nadieh was okay with me bending our rules
a little bit (again).
FEBRUARY
2018
–
JUNE
2018
NATURE

=== PAGE 263 ===
YELRIHS
262
Data
In June 2017, SFMOMA launched “Send Me SFMOMA,” a service where people could
text requests like “send me love,” or “send me art,” and SFMOMA would respond
with an artwork in their collection that best matched the request. They received
more than fve million texts from hundreds of thousands of people. A few months
later, they contacted me to do something with that data, and I was over the moon
with excitement.
When I frst started looking at the data, I did some simple explorations: what the
attributes were, what keywords were most popular, and what artworks came back
the most often (Figure 8.1). I also knew that I wanted the end result to be a painting,
because I’m a cheesy individual and I wanted to make art out of art. (*´艸`*)
The idea I ended up pitching to SFMOMA was to trace an individual’s “journey”
throughout the month, what “positive” or “negative” thing they might have asked
for, and what kind of artwork they got back. I wanted to see if I could experience
what that person experienced and feel what that person felt.
FFiigg..88..11
Notes from my initial
data exploration.

=== PAGE 264 ===
263
NATURE
As far as data collection, preparation, and cleaning went, this was probably one
of the most straightforward projects I’ve done for Data Sketches (and I’m really
grateful for that). For the data collection, SFMOMA gave me a huge fle of all the
texts they ever received and another huge 1TB fle of all the texts they ever sent
back. From that second fle, I wrote a script to only retrieve texts and information
from the frst 100 participants. I decided to focus on the frst 100 participants
because it otherwise would have been a lot to analyze, and I hypothesized that
the project’s early adopters would have the most interesting interactions.
I ran the keyword in each text through sentiment, a Node.js package that
gives a score for how positive or negative a word is, and my cousin Max
(a junior in college studying Computer Science) wrote a script to get additional
metadata for each artwork—including date, title, artists, country of origin, color
palette, and Shannon Entropy (how “chaotic” the artwork is)—from the
SFMOMA API.
Sketch
The very frst thing I did once I had the data was to try and implement my own
version of Tyler Hobb’s generative watercolor efect.1 It didn’t turn out quite well:
FFiigg..88..22
Tyler’s implementation (left) versus
my own attempt (right), a real case
of expectation versus reality.
(￣ロ￣·;)
1 https://tylerxhobbs.com/essays/2017/a-generative-approach-to-simulating-watercolor-paints

=== PAGE 265 ===
YELRIHS
462
But thankfully when I tweeted about this, my friend (and developer) Taylor Baldwin
came to the rescue with a link to his own implementation,2 and later on Tyler chimed
in with a fx.3 I was able to get my version looking more like Tyler’s (Figure 8.3), but
once I plugged in the actual data with each “paint stroke” colored by the artwork
SFMOMA texted back, it was a mess again (Figure 8.4).
Around the time I started working on this project, I had moved to Tokyo for
three months. Japan is a country that reveres nature and the change in seasons;
when I arrived in March, fowers were everywhere. I remember walking past
an ad of illustrated fowers in a subway station and doing a double take because
I just loved the whimsy and simple beauty of it. I knew then and there that I wanted
to work fowers and nature into the project.
As soon as I got back in front of my computer, I jotted down my ideas for how
to incorporate fowers into the visualization. At the same time, I started looking
at the SFMOMA API to see what kind of data I could get back about each artwork.
FFiigg..88..33
Programmatically
generated
“watercolor” strokes.
FFiigg..88..44
Programmatically
generated
“watercolor” efects
with data plugged in.
2 https://github.com/rolyatmax/watercolor-canvas
3 https://twitter.com/tylerxhobbs/status/959178572375232517

=== PAGE 266 ===
265
NATURE
I started working on the fower petals a few days later, taking what I learned
from the “Movies” project about SVG curve commands, as well as newly learned
functions like p5.js’s randomGaussian (randomness centered around p5.js is a JavaScript
a given number) and noise (an implementation of Perlin noise that simulates library for creating
generative art and
a more natural looking randomness) to get a more natural fower petal shape
interactive experiences
(Figure 8.5). I was especially proud of the hand-drawn efect I achieved, where on the web.
the lines of the petal vary in width as if they were drawn with a thin brush (Figure
8.6). I was able to do this by frst drawing the petal shape with an SVG path,
calling getPointAtLength to get the x/y coordinates every few pixels along
the path, and drawing a circle in canvas for every x/y coordinate I got back. The
most important part, though, was that as I drew the circles, I varied their radius
with Perlin noise so that they increased and decreased in size in a very natural
looking way (if I had used randomness instead, it would have looked very messy
and blotchy). I was inspired to try this approach after watching a series of explainers
on Perlin noise by Dan Shifman,4 where I learned how it was implemented.
FFiigg..88..55
Notes on what
metadata to map to a
fower (left) and how
to code more natural
looking fowers (right).
FFiigg..88..66
Iterations on natural
fower shapes, with
SVG to color the petals
and canvas to produce
the hand-drawn efect.
I’m extremely proud of
the hand-drawn efect;
I love it so much.
4 Dan Shifman, Introduction - Perlin Noise and p5.js Tutorial: https://www.youtube.com/watch? v=Qf4dIN99e2w

=== PAGE 267 ===
YELRIHS
662
Code
This was the project that proved that even if the data and sketch parts went
smoothly and I knew exactly what I wanted to do, the actual execution (code)
could still take a really, really long time.
For my very frst code attempt, I drew each text message as a fower placed
around a spiral (I was able to repurpose the code from my “Music” project
(*•` •´*) و̑̑), colored with the most predominant color in the artwork SFMOMA sent
back, and animated by the time the text message was sent (Figure 8.7). Not only was
it aesthetically unappealing, it was so computationally heavy that my Macbook Pro
(with 16GB RAM!) was choking up. I immediately moved the watercolor calculation
into a web worker so they wouldn’t clog up the UI.
Much to my sadness, I also decided to get rid of the hand-drawn efect
because it was too computationally expensive to loop through hundreds of points
along each fower petal when I was trying to draw hundreds of fowers, and the
result was too subtle to appreciate on such small fowers anyway.
FFiigg..88..77
First attempt at
drawing each text
message as fowers.
I didn’t know how to deal with the aesthetics, until I went to the joint graduation
exhibition of fve art universities at the National Art Center in Tokyo and saw
a gorgeous piece of a pregnant woman with fowers surrounding her. The fowers
were cut out of the paper, showing the watercolor underneath.

=== PAGE 268 ===
Web Workers
In data visualization, the performance bottleneck is usually in rendering to the
DOM (Document Object Model), but once in a while the data calculation will
be heavy enough to tie up the main CPU thread. And as JavaScript is single- For rendering
threaded, any time-consuming calculations will cause the page to become bottlenecks, consider
limiting the number
unresponsive and prevent user interaction until they’ve fnished processing,
of DOM operations or
which is horrible for user experience. Most of the time, we can move the super- using canvas instead
of SVG; see the lesson
heavy work (like calculating node-link positions with force simulations) ofine
“SVG vs. Canvas”
and load it in a fle with the calculations already done. But sometimes the fle will on page 82 of my
be too large or we need to do the calculations on the fy, and that’s when web “Olympics” chapter
for details.
workers are super helpful.
Web workers are background threads we can spin up to communicate back and
forth with the main thread, where regular JavaScript code is executed and user
interactions are handled. When we need to do some heavy computation, we can
send the data to the worker with postMessage and the main thread will be free
to keep executing other code or to listen for user events. The worker will receive
the data in an onmessage callback, execute the code, and pass the calculated
data back to the main thread to handle.
It’s important to keep in mind, though, that web workers don’t necessarily
execute the code any faster (as they’re still running on the CPU); they just don’t
freeze up the web page. They also don’t have access to the DOM, so we can’t
manipulate SVG elements or draw directly to a canvas element from within
a web worker.

=== PAGE 269 ===
YELRIHS
862
I was immediately taken by the cutout efect, and I knew I wanted to recreate it
(Figure 8.8). I was able to achieve the efect by using three layers of DOM elements:
1. A canvas element with the watercolor efects
2. A second canvas element that I flled fully white frst, then set the blend
mode (globalCompositeOperation) to destination-out so that any
subsequent fowers I drew subtracted from the white background like cutouts
3. A fnal SVG element on top that I used to draw the outlines for each
fower petal
I liked the look of this cutout efect very much, but soon realized that having
a fower for every text message was just too much, so I decided instead to only
draw a fower for each positive text message that was sent. I tried circles and
squares for the neutral and negative text messages, and eventually ended
up with leaves (Figure 8.8).
Even with the fowers and leaves fgured out, I was still unhappy with the layout
of the fowers, especially because text messages that were sent in close procession
translated to fowers that overlapped each other or were pushed of the edge
of the screen. I was stuck for weeks (and worked on other projects in the meantime)
until cherry blossom season hit Tokyo. Suddenly there was pink everywhere, and I lived in Japan for six
it was gorgeous and emotional, and I spent the whole week going to diferent spots years as a child, and
cherry blossoms are
to admire the cherry blossoms. (ﾉ^ ヮ ^)ﾉ*:・ﾟ✿
amongst my fondest
childhood memories.
FFiigg..88..88
The fowers with a cutout efect,
frst experiment with squares
and circles (left) and then with
leaves (right).

=== PAGE 270 ===
Custom Animations
Animations are an essential part of data visualizations—to convey the passage
of time, or to transition from one data state to the next—and it’s been extremely
helpful knowing how to implement them.
At its core, an animation needs an interpolator, duration, and (optionally) an easing
function. To implement a custom animation:
1. C reate an interpolator with a start and end value.
I nterpolators are functions that calculate all of the in-between values given
a start and end value. D3.js has a great implementation that not only
interpolates numbers, but also colors, strings (including simple SVG path
strings and CSS styles), arrays, and objects.
2. S tart a timer, and pass in t (elapsed time divided by animation duration)
to the interpolator at each tick.
T he most basic way to implement a timer is to pass a callback function
to requestAnimationFrame and use Date.now() to keep track of the
elapsed time. But personally, I like to use D3.js’s timer module that abstracts
that away for me.
3. O ptional: use an easing function to alter the rate of change in the animation
and make it feel more natural, because nothing in nature moves at a perfectly
linear rate. For example, when we drop a ball, it bounces a few times before
stopping, or when we open a drawer, we might pull it out quickly at frst but
slow down when it’s pulled out enough—we use easing functions when
we want to mimic natural motions like these.
4. T erminate the timer once the elapsed time is larger than the animation
duration.
I like using D3.js’s transition module when animating SVG elements and
Greensock’s timeline when I need to chain multiple animations together
and manage their timing. When I have to animate in canvas, I’ll go full-custom
with d3.timer() and d3.interpolate() functions.

=== PAGE 271 ===
YELRIHS
072
FFiigg..88..99 It was on one of those walks through Shinjuku Gyoen (Figure 8.9), one
of my favorite parks in Tokyo, that I realized: I was trying to lay out the fowers
A photo I took of
the beautiful cherry in random ways, but fowers grow on tree branches (what a facepalm moment),
blossoms in Shinjuku
and tree branches are just fractals. Thinking of the images in terms of fractals
Gyoen.
made it a very straightforward computer science problem to solve (Figure 8.10).
I again referenced Dan Shifman’s work, this time a chapter on fractals in his
book The Nature of Code. I adapted his code and drew my fowers on branches,
with each tree of fowers representing one day’s worth of text messages (Figure
8.11). I loved it immediately.
It took another two months after this point of tweaking to get to the fnal
product. I added a slight curve to the branches to make them look a bit more natural,
made the fower petal shape less spiky, fddled with the timing of the animations,
and fxed bugs.

=== PAGE 272 ===
271
NATURE
FFiigg..88..1100
Notes on how to
program fractal tree
branches.
FFiigg..88..1111
Flowers laid out with
branches.

=== PAGE 273 ===
YELRIHS
272
FFiigg..88..1122 But most of all, I had a lot of trouble laying out the trees (each representing a day
Flowers and trees of text messages). I originally wanted to have all the fowers “animate in” around
arranged around an a circle, surrounding the artworks SFMOMA sent back (Figure 8.12). This caused
artwork in a circular
several problems: there was a lot of overlap between days when the trees spread
layout. (Artwork
covered for copyright out too far, some of the bigger trees often disappeared of the screen, and most
reasons)
importantly, putting the artworks in the central circle meant cutting of the artwork—
something that went against the original artists’ wishes.
I decided to try out a horizontal layout next, frst with each tree (day) getting
the same amount of horizontal space. But with seven days and limited screen
space, I couldn’t fully display each tree. So I tried a carousel format next, where the
selected tree was layered above all of the other trees (Figure 8.13). And because
I had so much vertical space, I decided to put in additional information underneath
the tree: a log of the keywords texted and their corresponding timestamps. (I liked
thinking of this as the tree of fowers sprouting from the soil of that day’s text
messages. (*´艸`*))

=== PAGE 274 ===
273
NATURE
FFiigg..88..1133
Trees arranged
horizontally in a
carousel format.
I really liked this layout but missed being able to see all the trees unobscured at the
same time, and so I fnally adopted a layout where one tree could be expanded and
the rest would be minimized. This layout made me the happiest, not only because
I could see all the trees at the same time, but also because it was implemented with
CSS Grid and was perfectly responsive. The article “A Complete
Once I had the layout, I started working on the fnal touches. I named the fve Guide to Grid” on
CSS-Tricks6 was so
individuals whose text messages I chose to display with the keywords they asked
comprehensive, it was
for the most often (“love,” “happiness,” “smiles,” “sunshine,” “moons”), and wrote all I needed to get up
and running with Grid.
an artist statement. I added a legend and tried to tell a story with it: what mood the
individual was in (fower versus leaf), what they got back from SFMOMA (color),
and how that might have afected them (Figure 8.14). And to support the last part
of how the artwork might have afected them, I devised an interaction where
on hover, I drew an arrow from the last text message they sent to the next, and
so on. I loved this interaction because I found that I could follow the series of texts
the individuals sent, and learned that oftentimes, they were infuenced by the
artworks they got back.
Reflections
I love this project because I learned so much from it. I successfully used a web
worker and learned CSS Grid to lay out all of the trees. It will always remind me
of all the experiences I had in Japan, as my stay there deeply infuenced the form
of this visualization. I’ll always have little tweaks I want to do (I’m never 100%
satisfed with my projects), but it’s one of those projects where I’m really happy
with the outcome.
6 “A Complete Guide to Grid; CSS-Tricks”: https://css-tricks.com/snippets/css/complete-guide-grid/

=== PAGE 275 ===
Send Me Love
send-me-love.com
FFiigg..88..1177
Hovering a fower or leaf shows the
arrows pointing to the texts sent
before and after, as well as the key-
word in the text, timestamp, and the
artwork that was sent back. (Artwork
blurred for copyright reasons.)
FFiigg..88..1188
I loved the fowers so much I made
them into postcards.

=== PAGE 276 ===
275
NATURE

=== PAGE 277 ===
CULTURE
276

=== PAGE 278 ===
TURE
277

=== PAGE 279 ===
(no text extracted)

=== PAGE 280 ===
Beautiful
in English
NADIEH
I still remember Shirley and me getting an email from Alberto Cairo
in October 2016 that asked if we’d be interested in doing a Data Sketches
style project for Google News Lab. Our answer: yes, of course!
We were completely free to supply our own ideas for topics as long
as it revolved around Google data. So Shirley and I made a list with four
topics, and each of us put our own spin on it as usual. Simon Rogers, our
main point of contact at Google, picked the topic of “Culture,” something
a bit light and fun. Alberto oversaw the general progress of the designs,
akin to an art director.
My angle for “Culture” came from something I experience with Google
quite often. Being a Dutch native speaker who communicates in English
about 95% of my working day, I sometimes need to translate a word into
English. I either type “<<Dutch word>> in het Engels” into Google itself
or go to Google Translate (“in het Engels” means “into English” in Dutch).
I was really interested to know what people from other languages translate
into English the most, especially if it’s just one word. Do German speakers
search for the same kinds of word translations as Spanish speakers?
Would it reveal something about their cultures?
JANUARY
–
MARCH
2017
279
CULTURE

=== PAGE 281 ===
HEIDAN
082
Data
To help us get this data, we turned to the Google Translate team. They warned
us that the results would probably be quite mundane, but both Simon and I were
quite intrigued by that idea.
The Google Translate team wrote a query to get all the single word translations
that happened on Google Translate between August 2016 and December 2016 for
10 chosen popular languages. (That was about as far back as the translation queries
are saved.) Doing the query once took hours and extra resources, and therefore we
couldn’t get multiple subsets (such as a set per month). Nevertheless, I was super
excited about this one dataset, even if no time comparison was possible.
Before getting the actual data, I had already decided only to look at nouns.
I suspected that common words and phrases like “Hello” or “I” or “Thank you” Nouns are words used
would probably be the most often translated words. Instead I was interested in the to identify any of a
class of people, places,
more subtle diferences between the words that remained when the most common
or things. Such as
phrases were removed. So, after receiving the data, I wrote a script in R that could “dog” or “chair.”
help pick out nouns by tagging each English translation (and if available, tagging
the original word as well) with its grammatical form with the NLP and OpenNLP
packages in R.
FFiigg..99..11
The results of the auto-
mated word tagging.
Browsing through the results I noticed three things. First, the adjectives, typically
placed before a noun, such as “young” and “intelligent,” also held interesting results
and seemed quite diverse across languages. Therefore, I decided to keep both
nouns and adjectives. Whenever I say “most
Second, I saw that some languages have masculine and feminine variations translated word(s)”
from here on out
of the same word, such as “hermosa” (feminine) and “hermoso” (masculine), both
I mean this to be based
of which mean “beautiful” in Spanish. I also observed the use of synonyms which on the subset of nouns
and adjectives.
translated to one word in English, such as “bonito,” again, meaning beautiful
in Spanish. To get a fair comparison between rankings within languages, I combined
the search frequencies for all terms that translated to the same English word
manually (per language).

=== PAGE 282 ===
281
CULTURE
And third, as I’d expected, the automatically generated tagging results by R weren’t
perfect. For example, an English word can be both a verb or a noun, depending
on the context. Therefore, to get a top 10 word list per language, I actually ended up
looking up each original word that I wasn’t sure about on Wiktionary to see what the
most probable translation/grammatical form was. It took a long time, but I eventually
had a top 10 most translated word list for each of the 10 chosen languages.
To get an overall top 10 word list combining all the languages, I looked
at the rankings per language to compare relative popularity. I used a point based
system where the top word in a language would get the most points, the second
most popular word would get one point less, and so on. The overall most translated
word would then be the English translation that had the most points from
all languages combined.
Sketch
The sketching part of this project actually happened before the data preparation,
because Simon and Alberto wanted to see possible designs of visualizations
beforehand. As I was dealing with words and languages, I was inspired by the idea
of using the words themselves as much as possible. Initially I wanted each element
in the fnal visuals to be comprised of the word that it represented; all the visuals
would only consist of words. Figure 9.2 shows the (cleaned-up) designs that
I sketched on my iPad Pro and sent to Simon and Alberto.
FFiigg..99..22
The cleaned up design
made on my iPad
Pro of the diferent
translation-based
visuals

=== PAGE 283 ===
HEIDAN
282
I took a “start at the top and provide more details with each new visual” approach.
All the way at the top, I’d place the most often translated word across all languages.
Next, the most translated word per language would appear, which was interlinked
by a swirling word string consisting of the top 100 translated words overall.
Taking another step deeper would reveal the top 10 per language in a tree ring
like structure, comparing all the original words to their English translations. To see
similarities between languages I drew a network where each link represented
a word that both languages had in common between their top 10 words (such
as “beautiful”). Finally, there would be a bump chart comparing the top 10 across
time. However, this last bump chart eventually wasn’t possible because I only had
that one dataset without a time component.
For the frst time, I created a secret “mood board” on Pinterest just for It was so useful that
a project. Collecting things that inspired me resulted in many black-and-white I’ve been creating
these boards for
silhouettes, especially art-like pieces consisting mostly of cut-out hand lettering
almost every client
from children’s books. project I’ve done since.
During the project itself I also sketched a lot to help me fgure out the math.
All of the visuals have some form of text placed along curved paths. And for
all of these paths I had to fgure out the custom SVG path formula using math.
As an added difculty, the paths had to be constructed so words on crossing paths
wouldn’t overlap too much and the text had to be placed as upright as possible.
FFiigg..99..33 aa bb
((aa,,bb,,cc,,dd))
The many diferent
sketches I made to try
and fgure out which
word string concept I
could make work.
cc dd

=== PAGE 284 ===
283
CULTURE
For the top visual, where a string of words runs through the most translated word
of each language, I wanted something that swirled around in a very natural way.
However, I also had to make the page responsive and “mobile frst”. And I just
couldn’t fnd a programmable/mathematical way to create a natural looking swirl
that would work for many diferent screen sizes.
Therefore, I started to work more with the idea of “beads on a string” which
went down along an angle. Figure 9.3 shows that it still took a lot of sketches
to fgure out which layouts would work and how things should look and function
when either two, three, or four circles ft in a row on the screen.
Sketch to Discover and Remove
Thinking Errors
By sketching out the swirly path that I had in mind, I realized I couldn’t fnd a way
to actually recreate it in code. Thankfully, I was able to quickly iterate and think of other
ideas, eventually leading to the “beads on a string” concept. And I can’t say this often
enough: If you can’t make your design work logically on paper, it’s defnitely not going
to work on the computer with the actual data.
For the second visualization of the “tree ring” top 10 words per language I didn’t
have to sketch that much. The third visual of the network, on the other hand,
was more involved. Although the lines inside the network weren’t too difcult,
the problems arose when an outer circle, representing a language, was clicked
on, which made it move towards the center. I’ll spare you the details, but it had
to do with the text always reappearing in an upright manner combined with the
animation of the curved lines the text was drawn on. Figuring out how that was
supposed to work took even more pages in my little notebook!
FFiigg..99..44 aa bb
((aa,,bb,,cc,,dd))
A few of the sketches
I made to fgure out
the language similarity
network mathematics.
cc dd
(d)

=== PAGE 285 ===
HEIDAN
482
The fnal thing I looked into was the overall design of the page. I wanted to recreate
the old children’s book, black cut-out style imagery. But I couldn’t really fnd
a way to incorporate that with the theme of translations (or a responsive page).
So I eventually turned to hand lettering and decided to create my own title and
headers. Drawing them on my iPad Pro, I started out trying to make the letters look
smooth and fow nicely. However, for an inexperienced hand like mine, that was very
hard to do. Plus, I wasn’t happy with the resulting style. So instead I made them look
a bit quirky and imperfect, distinct from anything else I managed to fnd online.
FFiigg..99..55
Work-in-progress
screenshot of my
quirky header titles.
Code
In terms of coding, I started with the “tree ring” visual that displayed the top
10 most translated words of a language. By now I’d worked with SVG arcs often
enough in the past to set up the basic forms in an hour or so.
FFiigg..99..66
The very basics of the
tree ring visual.

=== PAGE 286 ===
285
CULTURE
Next, I focused on how to animate switching between languages. Due to space
constraints, especially on a mobile phone, I made one big circle in which the top
10 can be read. The other languages would be squished into tiny, almost fower-like,
circles. In my frst design, when clicked, a tiny circle would move towards the top
and simultaneously open up to reveal its top 10, while the previous big circle did
the exact opposite. However, when I had that working, the animation was extremely If I got a “tribble”
staggered. It was so bad that it became difcult to see that these two circles every time I had to
compromise on my
actually switched places.
original design due
Therefore, I set about trying a diferent approach: the text in the circle would to bad (animation)
performance, my
rotate out of view before rotating back in again in the new chosen language. When
apartment would be
I fnally overcame all the browser bugs to achieve the efect, I actually liked the result stufed by now…
more than the previous idea (Figure 9.7).
In terms of the design, Alberto suggested only making one word stand out
to prevent making the visual appear too busy. But as far as I know, it isn’t possible
to use diferent styles in one SVG textPath element. Therefore I incorporated
three diferent textPath elements: a light grey one on the left and a light grey one
on the right displaying the original word and a bigger black word with the English
translation in the middle (Figure 9.8). Figuring out how to place those three elements
so it looked like one string of words that never overlap was another “interesting”
puzzle to solve. ಥ_ಥ
FFiigg..99..88
FFiigg..99..77
The fnal design,
An older design of the showing the top 10
tree ring visual. Japanese words.

=== PAGE 287 ===
HEIDAN
682
Next up was creating the word string, or “word snake” as I started calling it. Because
I couldn’t mathematically fgure out the natural looking swirl while sketching the
design, I frst tried some other approaches, but I wasn’t happy with how those turned
out (Figure 9.9). I therefore revisited the swirl idea, this time visualizing the circles
as beads on a string—something that I could mathematically solve and create,
thankfully. Of course, actually coding up the correct SVG path formula took some
trial and error…
Due to screen size, I created several options for the “beads” to be positioned.
It calculates if two, three, or four circles ft in a row and the rest updates automatically.
Personally, I like the “two beads per row” version the most (Figure 9.10).
FFiigg..99..99
An initial idea to visual-
ize the most translated
word per language.
However, I didn’t like
the look of it.
aa
(a)
bb
(b)
cc
FFiigg..99..1100
((aa,,bb,,cc))
The diferent layouts for the top 100
word string depends on the available
screen width.

=== PAGE 288 ===
287
CULTURE
Learn to Love Math
You might already love math, but if you don’t, I highly recommend at least trying
to understand the basics of geometry, especially trigonometry (remember sine
and cosine?) and statistics.
When you start moving away from more mainstream visuals, and you want
to place the data on your screen according to your own design, chances are that
you’ll be needing some math to calculate those locations. For example, using a radial
layout will involve trigonometry. I’m not talking about difcult math here though—
no diferential equations—but knowing how to go from the (Euclidean coordinates of)
x and y to the (polar coordinates of) angle and radius, and back, will become invaluable.
For this project, being able to transform my “beads on a circle” sketches
to trigonometric functions that actually drew the swirly line made all the diference!
Alberto and Simon told me that the word string made the inner “language circles”
look like they could be clicked on, as if they were buttons. That hadn’t been my
original intent, but that did make me think about what other interesting information
I could reveal on a hover or click to reward the people that actually interacted with
the visual.
This brought me to Google Trends, where I looked up the trend of these most
translated words and their related queries. Thankfully, all of the words had some
interesting peaks and dips throughout the past few years. I thus set about making
the most extensive tooltip I’ve ever made! At the top it showed the worldwide trend I annotated the line
of the English word over the last fve years. Below the line chart I added a word chart in the tooltip
using the awesome
cloud about the related queries. (The word “mama” was defnitely my favorite, with d3-annotation.js
related queries such as “maternal insult” and “yo mama”.) library.
FFiigg..99..1111
The most extensive
tooltip I’ve ever made,
which reveals itself
when hovering over
the most translated
word of one of the
10 languages.

=== PAGE 289 ===
HEIDAN
882
The fnal visual of the full piece was focused on showing the similarities between the
top 10 word lists. Each language is a circle and each word that two languages have
in common between their top 10 is represented by a line. Interestingly, the highest
similarity happened between Spanish, Portuguese, and Italian, and also with Russian
and Polish.
I frst had to set up a system in which two “nodes” could be connected by
multiple “links.” Typically people use a thicker line when two nodes are more highly
linked. However, because I wanted to eventually replace the lines with their actual
words, I had to fnd something else. Using ever more curved lines seemed like
an elegant solution.
FFiigg..99..1122 (aaa ) bb (b)
((aa,,bb,,cc,,dd))
Setting up the
network with multiple
links between two
nodes, getting ever
more curved.
cc dd
(c) (d)

=== PAGE 290 ===
289
CULTURE
I then replaced the lines with the words themselves, using a design similar to the
tree ring and saw … chaos (Figure 9.13 a). I totally forgot to think about the fact that
many lines would overlap, making it impossible to read the words. Furthermore, the
words themselves made the visual extremely full and cluttered. So I put the lines
back in and only kept the words on those lines attached to the central circle. Alberto
advised to make it even more minimal and only keep the central dark (English) word
on the line, to really get the focus.
(c)
(a)
aa bb
FFiigg..99..1133 (b)
((aa,,bb,,cc))
cc
Going from chaos
to an ever more
minimal and focused
design for words
on the network lines.
More time than I’d like to admit later, and the animation to click a language circle
and make it move smoothly towards the center was working. And with that all of the
three visuals were done! I investigated some interesting insights that I’d discovered
from each visual and wrote the accompanying text, added in my hand-drawn
section headers, to have the whole become my frst fully-fedged article as part
of Data Sketches.

=== PAGE 291 ===
Dataviz for Both Mobile and Desktop
This was the frst project where it was important that all the visuals worked well on both
desktop and mobile screen sizes. Making a data visualization work on widely diferent screen
sizes is one of the most difcult (and sometimes frustrating) aspects of my work. I totally
ignored small screens in all of my previous projects, but I do try and fnd proper ways to handle
the large diference in screen real estate when I have to. What I see a lot on the web is to either
scale down the whole visual to ft it on smaller screens, or to stack sections horizontally on
large screens and vertically on small screens. Naturally, there are other ways as well. My favorite
is more about changing the layout and moving the data itself. Instead of scaling anything down,
you move things around to make the most out of the available space. For example, the fnal
visual from this project uses this approach. On large screens the languages are displayed
in a circular layout, which is a visually pleasing shape. However, on mobile screens the network
becomes a rectangle, so the “language circles” can be placed as far apart as possible .
FFiigg..99..1144
The circular version on large screens and
the rectangular layout on small screens.
The same idea happens for the word snake in Figure 9.10, where I don’t make the language
circles any smaller, but instead move them into a smaller and smaller layouts. This required more
math to fgure out how the swirly line of words should be calculated, with either two, three,
or four beads side by side. However, 80% of that was already done by fguring out how to draw
the swirly line for one of those options. So keep an open mind when you have to create a data
visualization that needs to work well on many diferent sizes; there’s more possible than just
scaling and stacking.

=== PAGE 292 ===
291
CULTURE
Reflections
This was defnitely the project that took the most hours to create until now (about
120 hours), but it was also the biggest one, so that makes sense. And, having done
this as an actual, paid project made it easy to justify working on it. (⌐ _ )
It was really great for Shirley and me to work together with Google and Alberto
Cairo. I thoroughly enjoyed having the chance to create such an extensive, full,
dataviz-driven story using data that I had specifcally requested and that was
impossible to fnd anywhere else!

=== PAGE 293 ===
Beautiful in English
BeautifulInEnglish.com
FFiigg..99..1155
The tooltip for the word “beautiful.”
FFiigg..99..1166
The frst visual showing the most translated word
for each of the 10 chosen languages. Hovering over
or clicking on a word reveals an elaborate tooltip
that shows Google Trends about that word over
the past fve years. Because some languages have
multiple words that translate to the English word
“beautiful,” every now and then the words in the
center might change. Such as Spanish switching
between “hermosa,” “hermoso,” and “bonito.”

=== PAGE 294 ===
293
CULTURE
FFiigg..99..1177
The full overview of the
“Beautiful in English” page.

=== PAGE 295 ===
HEIDAN
492
aa bb cc
FFiigg..99..1188
((aa,,bb,,cc))
The tree ring visual while a change
between languages happens. First
the previous language rings rotate
away and afterwards the new
language rings rotate back in.
FFiigg..99..1199
The header for the frst section that
reveals the most translated word for
10 popular languages.
FFiigg..99..2200
The quirky header for the second
section of the article that looks at the
top 10 per words language.

=== PAGE 296 ===
295
CULTURE
aa bb
cc dd
ee
FFiigg..99..2211
((aa,,bb,,cc,,dd,,ee))
Hovering over a language in the
similarity network highlights all the
lines connected to it to provide
a focus for the viewer.

=== PAGE 297 ===
(no text extracted)

=== PAGE 298 ===
297
Explore
Adventure
SHIRLEY
When Nadieh and I got the email from Alberto Cairo and Simon Rogers
to work with Google News Lab, I was ecstatic and beyond intimidated.
After all, it was Google, it was Simon and Alberto, and they had search data
going back to 2004. They had already published projects in collaboration
with Accurat and Truth & Beauty (two data visualization studios whose
works I fnd really inspiring), and I wasn’t sure if I could live up to that—
but I was determined to try my best.
Nadieh and I explored Google Trends and presented a few ideas, and Simon
and Alberto chose our “Culture” proposal. Nadieh decided to look into
language and explored the most common words people in other countries
searched for to translate into English. I chose to focus on travel and dug
into the travel destinations that people in one country searched for
in another.
And because Alberto was a fan of our process write-ups, we agreed
to include our “Culture” projects and their corresponding write-ups
as part of Data Sketches.
JANUARY
–
APRIL
2017
CULTURE

=== PAGE 299 ===
YELRIHS
892
Data
As Simon preferred having the data live-update, I subcontracted my friend Charles
(my very frst subcontractor!) to build a database that would periodically pull
udpated data from Google Trends and process them into the format my client-side
visualizations needed. It was really fun and encouraging to have someone else
to work on the project with; not only did he do most of the data collection and
clean-up (so I didn’t have to (ﾉ ≧ ∀ ≦ )ﾉ), but it was also great to bounce ideas
of of someone who was intimately familiar with the data.
To start, we began with a central question: given a country, which other
countries searched for that country the most? Were people looking for particular
cities in that country? Museums? Specifc landmarks? And as I started digging into
the data with Google Trends’ Explore function, I also started to wonder if people
looked for places geographically closer to them. This thought occurred to me when
I saw that Australians often searched for places on the American West Coast, which
is geographically closer to them than other parts of the United States.
With Google Trends, I can enter up to fve search terms and get back their
“search interest” (a score out of 100 that describes the term’s relative popularity),
search interest by region, and related and top topics over a specifc time period.
I can also flter the results by time range, by a specifc “source” country, and
by broad, Google-defned categories:
FFiigg..99..11
The data we were
ultimately trying to
get. Because of how
Google Trends works,
we had to approach
it from the opposite
direction and start with
the “target” countries
to be able to get their
“source” countries,
and fnally get topics
for that pair.
(From now on, I’ll call countries that did the searching the “source” countries,
and the 20 countries that were searched for the “target” countries.)
To get the data needed, we:
1. S earched for every country using Google’s list of country IDs and narrowed
the results down by both the category “Travel → Tourist Destinations” and
the date “2004 - present.”
2. U sed the results to aggregate the top 20 most searched for “target”
countries.
3. N oted the “source” countries (found in “search interest by region”) that
searched for each of the 20 “target” countries the most in every quarter
since 2004.
4. N oted the top Google-defned topics (“Niagara Falls,” “Terracotta
Soldiers,” “Naples,” etc.) for each set of “source” and “target” countries.
The plan sounded reasonable when we frst came up with the steps, but the data
we got back was overwhelmingly vast. We had thousands of travel-related topics,
and in order to make sense of all those topics, we needed a way to meaningfully
categorize them.

=== PAGE 300 ===
299
CULTURE
As the topics were defned by Google, Charles used Google’s Knowledge Graph
Search to fnd their details, including images, descriptions, and an array of “types”
for each topic. Three of the most common “types”—cities, people, and nature—
made sense as categories, but the remaining types were more difcult to defne.
Some were too broad, like “Thing” or “Place,” and others were too narrow, like
“LodgingBusiness” or “MovieTheater.” After much discussion, we came up with eight
categories that could encompass the 252 “types” we got back from the Knowledge
Graph: city, region, attraction, nature, person, history, arts, and other:
FFiigg..99..22 From there, Charles produced a mapping of the Knowledge Graph “types”
Relationship between to our eight categories and was able to map most of the thousands of travel topics
topics, types, and that way. For the 45 remaining topics that either fell into multiple categories or none
categories.
at all, we manually assigned their category.
Sketch & Code
Because there was so much data, I switched between sketching my ideas and
prototyping those ideas on the screen for this project. I started by looking at Brazil
(the top searched country for travel) as well as the countries that searched for For the longest time
it in a given year, defaulting to 2016 (Figure 9.3). Immediately, I could tell by I wondered why Brazil
was the top searched
looking at the map that a lot of the countries that searched for Brazil were indeed
country for travel,
geographically close to Brazil, proving my theory. But this map only showed 2016 and I fnally have
a theory: Brazil was
search data, and I wanted a way to see a breakdown of all the countries searching
the host country for
for Brazil each year since 2004. the Olympics in 2016!
