

=== PAGE 51 ===
 
 
  
  
 
 
Drawing with SVG 
syntax (how I think about them) 
There are many ways to draw shapes on a web page, but SVG is probably the most 
straightforward to learn because of how semantically similar it is to HTML. 
For example, to draw a circle centered around [0,0] with a radius of 10, I would write: 
<circle cx=“0” cy=“0” r=“10”></circle> 
And I can manipulate it just like any other HTML element, updating attributes and registering 
event handlers. 
Out of all the SVG elements, I like to use circle, rect, text, path, and g (group) the most 
often. And out of those, my absolute favorite is path, because with it, I can draw any shape 
I can imagine. 
This is the SVG path I use to draw the cherry blossom petal: 
<path d=“M0,0 C50,40 50,70 20,100 L0,85 L-20,100 C-50,70 -50,40 
0,0”></path> 
In the path string, I use three diferent commands: 
Command 
Move to “Pick the pen of the paper, put it back down at x, y.”M x,y 
Line To “Make sure the pen is already on the page and draw a line to x, y”L x,y 
Curve to “Make sure the pen is already on the page and draw a line to the 
end position. Then take the frst control point and the second 
control point and nudge them until we get the curve we want” 
C x,y x,y x,y 
It’s exactly like drawing 
curves with the pen tool 
in Illustrator. 


=== PAGE 52 ===
 
  
  
  
So let’s break down the cherry blossom path: 
I have to admit: it can be cumbersome to write the path string out by hand, and it’s defnitely 
easier (and faster) to draw the shape in Illustrator and export as SVG. But I’m a frm believer 
in knowing how something works, and I’m so glad I taught myself these path commands. 
I’m no longer restricted by the shapes that SVG ships with, and I’m not intimidated by the 
long path strings when I have to inspect or debug. 


=== PAGE 53 ===
52 
SHIRLEY
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Fig.1.9
The most fun part was adding the colors. I used D3.js’s d3.scaleOrdinal() 
(discrete input, discrete output) to map a movie’s genre to the corresponding color 
and created an SVG for each color. I liked the efect, but felt that the circle’s edges 
were too harsh, and that’s when I remembered Nadieh’s set of (brilliant) “SVGs 
beyond mere shapes”
1 tutorials where she covered diferent gradients, flter efects, 
and blend modes. I went through her tutorials on CSS blend modes (multiply) 
and SVG flters (feGaussianBlur) to make the colored circles look blended 
together and the edges feathered.
 Finally, I used two SVG transform attributes—translate and rotate— 
to ofset the colors just enough to overlap each other and angle correctly 
depending on the number of genres for that movie (Figure 1.9). That calculation 
took me longer than I expected; I went through a lot of back and forth on how 
I wanted to deal with movies with only one or two genres (for one genre, the colored 
circle is centered, and for two, they are stacked vertically on top of each other) 
and spent quite some time nudging the circles together and apart so that they’d 
ft inside the overall shape of the fowers. 
Fig.1.9 
The fowers with 
color assigned 
and positioned. 
Reflections 
I was incredibly happy with the end result; I gushed about it to anyone who would 
listen for a good few days. One of my favorite fnds is defnitely Batman & Robin 
from 1997, which had an unfortunate 3.7 /10 rating on IMDb and is the most adorably 
tiny speck of a fower. Others, like Inception, were marvelously large and complex. 
But of all the fowers, my favorite is defnitely Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows: 
Part 2, for all the sentimental memories the movie holds for me. 
This project is still one of my favorites. I think it’s really beautiful in its simplicity, 
but because there is a clear mapping of the data, I can still fnd interesting patterns 
in the data. It gave me a frm grasp on custom SVG paths, which I was previously 
intimidated by, and started me on fowers, a theme I have revisited many more 
times since. 
1 Nadieh Bremer, “SVGs beyond mere shapes”: 
https:/ /www.visualcinnamon.com/2016/04/svg-beyond-mere-shapes.html 

=== PAGE 54 ===
  
 
 
  
 
    
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scales in D3.js 
Scales are one of the most important parts of the D3.js library; I use them in every project. 
At its base, we need two things for a scale: an input that we pass into domain and an output 
that we specify with range. I like to think of scales as mapping from the raw data ( domain) 
to the web page (range). 
Take, for example, a line chart of average temperatures throughout one year. We would 
want to map the dates to the x-axis and the temperatures to the y-axis. So we would create 
two scales: 
∙ A d3.scaleTime(), passing in the frst and last date as domain and mapping those 
to the left-most and right-most x-position, respectively, passing those into range. 
∙ 
year as domain and mapping those to the bottom and top y -positions of the visualization, 
respectively. 
A d3.scaleLinear(), passing in the minimum and maximum temperatures seen that 
In the “Sketch” section, I talked about 
marks and channels, and about assigning 
data attributes to visual channels. I think 
of D3.js scales as the natural next step; 
it is the code that will turn data attributes 
into visual channels. 

=== PAGE 55 ===
 
Film Flowers 
shirleywu.studio/projects/flmfowers 


=== PAGE 56 ===
55 
MOVIES
 
Fig.1.10
Fig.1.11
Fig.1.10 
A few of the most iconic 
movies as flm fowers. 
Fig.1.11 
My favorite flm fowers either 
because I have very fond memories 
associated with them, or in the case 
of Batman & Robin, because it’s 
so tiny and cute! 

=== PAGE 57 ===
56 
SHIRLEY
 
 
 
 
Fig.1.12
Fig.1.12 
Summer blockbusters 
from my high school 
and university years. 
A personal detail I don’t 
explain in the legend: one 
leaf means I’ve seen the 
movie, and two means 
I saw it in theatres. Some 
of my favorite flms are 
from those years, because 
I started going to the 
theatres with friends 
(๑￫‿￩๑)

=== PAGE 58 ===
57 
MOVIES
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.1.13
Fig.1.14
Fig.1.15
Fig.1.13 
I also had fun turning flm 
fowers into washi tape! 
Fig.1.14 
I wanted to include 
a legend with the flm 
fowers washi tape 
I sold. I went through 
a few iterations until 
I landed on the 
fnal (right). 
و 
Fig.1.15 
The washi tape packed and 
ready to ship 

=== PAGE 59 ===
58 
OLYM 

=== PAGE 60 ===
59 
YMPICS 

=== PAGE 61 ===
[no text]

=== PAGE 62 ===
  
 
 
 
  
  
Olympic 
Feathers 
NADIEH 
Before work on this project truly got underway, I already knew what 
data I wanted to look at: a list of every Olympic gold medalist since the 
frst Olympic Games in 1896. I always love topics that have a rich history; 
they generally have relatively big and (mostly) diverse datasets. And the 
Olympics lends itself really well for interesting anecdotes about events 
that happened in the past, which can be used to point out parts 
of a visualization. 
AUGUST 2016 61 OLYM PICS 

=== PAGE 63 ===
62 
NADIEH
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data 
Thankfully, The Guardian, a newspaper in the UK, already created the exact dataset1 
that I needed. It contained a list of every Olympic medalist (gold, silver, and bronze) 
from 1896 to 2008 (they published the list of 2012 medalists 2 in a separate article). 
This was a big help because the ofcial website for the Olympics presents the same 
data in a cumbersome way, making you manually select the edition, sport, and event 
before you see any results. 
After combining the 1896–2008 and 2012 datasets in R, I made two choices 
to downsize it to something more manageable; I would only look at gold medalists 
and only count the winning country (and not individual team members) for 
team events. This would result in a dataset with unique values comprised of the 
combination of Olympic edition (year), sporting discipline, gender, event, and winner. 
However, I noticed the 2012 dataset didn’t contain all the medalists. 
(⊙.⊙) 
Many team events, such as hockey, were missing and several diving medals weren’t 
in there either. These discrepancies forced me to check each of the 41 sporting 
disciplines held in 2012 and manually add the information about the missing 
medalists. This discrepancy made me worry about the 1896–2008 dataset, 
so I decided to double–check those fgures as well. I aggregated the total dataset 
per Olympic edition to see how many unique gold medals it contained and in how 
many unique sports and disciplines these were won. Next, I searched through 
the Wikipedia pages of each Olympic edition to see if the number of events held 
matched the number of gold medals from my fle. This wasn’t always the case, 
but there was always a reason to be found after some more digging. For example, 
in several years, strangely enough, the names of horses competing in equestrian 
sports were included in the Guardian fle (Figure 2.1). This did make for an interesting 
“quest” to fnd the horses, but they were easy to locate. (I don’t know many other 
competitors named “Prinzess” or “Lady Mirka”—without a last name—that won 
gold!) After a few data adjustments, my confdence that all the gold medals were 
indeed in the dataset was restored. 
The next step was to prepare an empty dataset for 2016. To do this, I looked 
at the 2012 events list and a page on the Olympics’ website that outlined the 
diferences between the 2012 and 2016 editions. This empty 2016 dataset would 
make it possible for me to take the data into account during the creation of the 
visualization. Then, during the 2016 games, I spent 15 minutes each day manually 
adding every new 2016 gold medalist’s name and country to the dataset, and the 
visualization would be updated automatically. 
A major data quirk that I had to reconcile during this project was country names. 
The map of the world has changed a lot since 1896; countries have disappeared and 
new ones have been created. Because the fve Olympic colors are so well known, 
and most people think that they represent fve continents, I knew from the start that 
I wanted to color each medal by the continent in which the country lies that won. 
I therefore had to map each country’s National Olympic Committee (NOC) Olympic 
country code to the ofcial country ISO code, which I could then map to a continent 
using the countrycode package in R. For the handful of countries that no longer 
exist, I manually mapped them to their most obvious current counterpart. I only 
really needed a correct continent, not the exact country. 
The Guardian 
published these 
datasets for the 2012 
Olympics in London. 
For a short explanation 
of R, please see 
“Technology & Tools” 
at the beginning 
of the book. 
For some events 
no gold medal was 
awarded due to diverse 
circumstances. 
Knowing the data 
visualization colors 
from the get-go 
practically never 
happens for me. 
1 Olympic medal winners dataset from The Guardian: 
https:/ /www.theguardian.com/sport/datablog/2012/jun/25/olympic-medal-winner-list-data 
2 Olympics 2012 medal breakdown from The Guardian: 
https:/ /www.theguardian.com/sport/datablog/2012/aug/10/olympics-2012-list-medal-winners 

=== PAGE 64 ===
63 
O LYM PI CS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.2.1
Check Data Accuracy 
and Completeness 
Checking the accuracy of your data is a standard practice in data analysis, and while 
not the most fun activity, is a lesson we have to constantly relearn. Thankfully, you often 
don’t have to check every value manually. Instead, think about taking sums, counts, and 
averages and comparing these to common sense values (is the total revenue 10x too big 
or too small?), or even better, whenever possible, to a diferent data source (is the total 
revenue that I get about the same as what was published in the annual report?). 
Missing data can actually be harder to fnd than wrong data. With wrong data you 
can often see something odd when you look at summary statistics or when you create 
simple charts. In the Olympics piece I only noticed the missing data because I knew from 
experience that every recent edition should have exactly one hockey medal for both 
genders. Once I fgured out that the data wasn’t complete, I had to think of a diferent 
dataset that could show me my data gaps. This doesn’t have to be the exact same data 
of course. Often you don’t have a duplicate of the data somewhere else, so you have 
to think about a proxy instead; it can indirectly show you where something is missing. 
For this instance that became the number of events that occurred during each edition 
(data that can be fairly easily found online), which I then compared to the number of gold 
medals I had in my data. 
Fig.2.1 
For several Olympic 
editions, the horses 
were also in the 
dataset alongside their 
riders. Not labelled 
as horses, but as either 
men or women. 
After the Olympics of 2016 ended I added one more level of data to the visual: Practically all records 
in athletics and
the current Olympic records and world records. I thought it would be interesting swimming are set 
to see which records have been standing for quite some time and which were by the gold medalists, 
beaten in 2016. but this was less often 
the case in rowing
I couldn’t fnd one nice overview of all the record holders, so I spent 2–3 hours and archery 
manually searching for and adding these records to my dataset. 

=== PAGE 65 ===
64 
NADIEH
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Add Context Using Remaining 
Visual Channels 
Even if the visualization is mostly complete, I always try to see how I can add more context 
by visualizing other data variables using remaining “visual channels.” Visual channels are 
the components of a data visualization that we can use to encode data. Position, color, size, 
and shape are a few examples of channels that can be used. In this case, I added a white 
circle on top of each medal slice in the cases where they resulted in Olympic records or 
world records. This can both make the whole more visually appealing and also give the truly 
interested reader even more ways to dive into and understand the main story that you’re 
trying to convey. But be aware to not go over the top and keep these “extras” to a minimum. 
Sketch 
The initial inspiration for the visual style of this project came from a very nice design 
of a peacock’s tail made by Ryan Bosse.
3 While admiring the image, I suddenly 
realized that the peacock’s tail feathers could work really well with my data, too. 
Each sport becomes a “feather,” with the symmetry around the middle to distinguish 
between men’s and women’s events. Furthermore, the narrow tip at the start that 
widened towards the outside of the feather could represent each Olympic edition. 
That way I could place more emphasis on the later editions, using more “pixels” 
to represent medals won in recent editions versus medals won long ago. 
I whipped out my iPad Pro and started sketching some feather shapes 
(see Figure 2.2). However, I quickly realized that not all sports have exactly one 
medal per gender. And there were other issues with the sketch, such as the initial 
feather heights. With diferent heights, the same years wouldn’t align to the same 
distance from the center, making it more difcult to compare one Olympic edition 
across all sporting disciplines. But even with all its errors, I felt that the abstract 
idea was intriguing enough to explore further. 
The next morning, I asked a friend and former colleague if he’d like to help me 
think through the design some more (due to Shirley being on vacation at the time). 
The process of sketching my idea to him and trying to explain my reasoning helped 
me realize that there were other logical issues with my design concept (see Figure 
2.3). For example, some sporting disciplines have many events in which a medal 
can be won. Therefore, several feathers would get very wide, such as athletics and 
swimming. Would that still work as a single feather? 
Also, the number of events changed a lot throughout the years, with new 
events being added and others being removed. I thus had to make a choice on what 
exactly would defne one medal; would I stretch each edition’s number of events 
to the outside of the feather, or always use the same arc length per medal (i.e., 
number of degrees)? I went with the latter option, because it felt more consistent 
across the whole, which created a lot of white space for sports where a large 
number of events were held during only one edition, such as shooting or archery 
in 1920. Ultimately, I believed this would give an interesting insight into the history 
of the modern Olympics. 
He preferred to just be 
called “a friend.” 
3 Image of a peacock tail by Ryan Bosse: https:/ /dribbble.com/rdbosse/projects/230311-Adobe-Creative-Cloud 

=== PAGE 66 ===
65 
O LYM PI CS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.2.2
Fig.2.3
Fig.2.2 
The frst sketch 
that I drew where 
I investigated how 
the data could 
be structured 
as a “feather.” 
Fig.2.3 
Several sketches 
that arose while trying 
to explain my idea 
to a friend and coming 
across more logical 
errors in my design. 
Now that I decided each medal would be the same arc length and expected that 
would result in more white space for some sports, I realized it would be a good idea 
to calculate how “big” a medal would actually become if I placed all 56 sports into 
one giant circle (which was my initial idea). A few aggregations in R and some math 
later and I knew for sure that one circle wasn’t going to work. Even a medal in the 
outermost ring of 2016 would barely be a few pixels wide. Using the Olympic logo 
itself for inspiration, fve circles seemed the next best choice. 

=== PAGE 67 ===
66 
NADIEH
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.2.4Fig.2.4 
Final sketch in which 
I tested out ordering 
the continents either 
always in the same 
order (stacked) or from 
the continent that won 
the most during that 
edition to the least 
(ranked). 
I sketched out a more detailed version to see how it might look with the new 
insights I’d gained about the quirks of this particular dataset (see Figure 2.4). At frst, 
I focused on the medals themselves because I wasn’t quite sure if they should be 
sorted in a specifc order. But then I decided to sort by continent that won the most 
medals during that edition to the least, because it added additional layers of insight 
and context to the data. 
After completing this fnal sketch, it was high time to create it using the actual 
data to see if it would work with all ±5,000 gold medals. 
Sketch to Discover and Remove 
Thinking Errors 
This project required a lot of diferent sketches for the same basic idea with each 
version building on lessons learned from the previous drawing. Even when you think 
you have the perfect idea for a visual form in your head, the mind is exceptionally good 
at glossing over logical faults in the design. It can either be aspects of the data itself 
that you’re not thinking of or that the design is visually not going to work with the 
particular dataset. 
By sketching out the design in your head onto a piece of paper, you’ll likely catch 
any potential issues with your idea early on, saving time later down the line. At this 
stage, you can iterate on your initial drawing and come up with a new sketch that solves 
the issues. Don’t worry; you don’t have to be an artist to sketch out data visualization 
designs. It’s mostly rectangles, circles, and simple curves anyway. 
If you can’t make your design work logically 
on paper, it’s defnitely not going to work 
on the computer with the actual data. 

=== PAGE 68 ===
67 
O LYM PI CS
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Fig.2.5
Fig.2.6
Fig.2.7
Code 
First, I needed to get those medals on the screen using my carefully prepared 
(in R) nested medal JSON fle. As always, that never happens correctly the frst time 
you think you have enough code typed out to see something decent on the screen. 
For example, forgetting that, although rotate in CSS works with degrees, Math. 
cos()and Math.sin() in JavaScript work with radians (Figure 2.5); or when you 
somehow set the rotation of each sport to the same number (degrees this time) 
making them overlap each other in Figure 2.6. 
Decreasing the medal’s opacity helped me fgure out what I was doing wrong, 
until I fnally had a rather odd looking (almost abstract) art thing on my screen 
in Figure 2.7. 
Fig.2.5 
Five circles where each 
medal is much too wide, 
due to using the values 
for degrees in a sine/ 
cosine function, which 
stretched each medal 
out over the entire 
circle’s circumference. 
Fig.2.6 
Correct medal lengths 
and placement, but 
now each sport’s slice/ 
feather is rotated 
to exactly the same 
degree, making them 
overplot. 
Fig.2.7 
Making the medals 
transparent helped 
me realize at what point 
each sport seemed 
to have been rotated 
to their expected 
location. 


=== PAGE 69 ===
68 
NADIEH
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
   
 
    
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Precalculate “Visual” Variables 
Even though the fnal visual was made with D3.js through JavaScript, it doesn’t 
mean that I had to calculate all the “visual aspects” at the same time (in JavaScript). 
When dealing with a fxed dataset, which was the case for this Olympics piece, I prefer 
to precalculate the more complex aspects of the visual because I personally fnd 
it easier to perform these calculations in R. But the same applies to any combination 
of tools. The tool/language that you end up creating your visualization with isn’t 
necessarily the best or easiest tool to fgure out aspects such as placements, 
rotations, sizes, shapes, etc. that are based on the data. 
I like to call these types of additions to my data “visual variables.” Visual 
variables have nothing to do with the original dataset, but only apply to how the 
data will be laid out on the screen. For example, for this project I precalculated 
the following “visual variables”: 
∙ How far each of the fve circles as a whole should be rotated to have the opening 
pointing center down 
∙ How many degrees each of the inner sport feathers had to be rotated, based 
on the feathers that came before it 
∙ And how far each medal had to be ofset from the center of a feather 
The only placement variable that I kept calculating “on the fy” in JavaScript was the 
edition/year scale that decided how far from the center a medal should be drawn. 
This made it simpler to increase or decrease the circles based on screen width. 
These visual variables can either be attached to your original dataset, such 
as when you’ve predefned an x and y location per data point, or loaded as a completely 
separate fle and referenced at the right moments. A personal extra beneft in doing this 
is that it makes my JavaScript a lot more concise. (⌐■_■) 
What I love about this type of extremely structured setup, is that once it works for 
one (nested) object, it works for all of them. Either all ±5,000 medals are still wrongly 
placed on the screen, or they are all correct after your next code change. You can 
certainly design with dummy data in a tool such as Sketch or Adobe Illustrator, 
but it’s just impossible to capture the nuance and complexity of seeing your idea 
applied to real data. In Figure 2.8, I fnally had all of the medals in place and sporting 
disciplines labelled. 
With the medals in place, I started working on the feather shape. I had not 
expected that some disciplines would be so exceptionally wide (athletics took 
up more than half a circle). So I pulled up my now go-to “SVG path playground” 
website
4 to wrap my head around the math that I needed to mimic the shape 
of a feather’s tip. Luckily, my work with the Lord of the Rings visualization from 
the previous project meant that custom SVG paths were still fresh in my mind 
and it surprised me how fast I got the feather tip shape to appear (see Figure 2.9 ). 
To make the wider feathers look better, I created multiple tips if a feather 
was too wide (a simple idea, but not so easy to actually create). A fair amount 
of iterations later, and having increased my knowledge of custom SVG paths even 
further, the circles looked a lot better (Figure 2.10). 

=== PAGE 70 ===
O LYM PI CS
Fig.2.8
Fig.2.9
Fig.2.10
Fig.2.8 
All the medals are 
fnally in their correct 
location. 
Fig.2.9 
Clipping the circles  
so each sport’s feather 
would end in exactly 
one “tip.” 
Fig.2.10 
If a sporting discipline 
was too wide, it got 
several feather tips. 
69 
4 SVG Cubic Bézier Curve Example: http:/ /blogs.sitepointstatic.com/examples/tech/svg-curves/cubic-curve.html 

=== PAGE 71 ===
70 
NADIEH
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Fig.2.11Fig.2.11 
Adding several small 
and subtle changes 
to the shape of each 
sport’s “feather” 
to make the whole 
look a little better. 
Now that the “broad outline” of the feathers was in place, I focused on changing 
the details. Figure 2.11 looks a lot like Figure 2.10, but the darker lines were removed 
completely or turned white. I padded the feathers to make the shapes more 
pronounced and the feather tips curve just a little bit more smoothly on each end. 
Finally, I was proud of how the visual looked! 
I sent the image to my friend for feedback. He gently made it clear that the feather 
tips didn’t work with the design and the topic. After a day of denial (all that time 
spent on the code!), I followed his advice and commented out the code for the 
feather tips. 
That dreary grey background defnitely wasn’t what I wanted for the fnal 
result—it helped to better assess the feather shapes during the development— 
I wanted to go back to white. However, what should I do with the white inside the 
circles? Thankfully, my friend came back with a wonderful example that he’d made 
that used a subtle gradient to fll each circle. The example helped clarify which 
section of a feather related to the men’s and women’s events by coloring the 
backgrounds either bluish or reddish. And it’s always a bonus when visual elements 
are given a data or explanatory function, instead of “just” doing it for visual reasons. 
After coding the radial gradients into the visual, the feathers looked practically 
fnished (Figure 2.12). 
The fnal big aspect of the overall project was getting the introduction, 
annotations and legends in there. One textual aspect that I wanted to add were 
annotations about weird, amazing, or silly things that happened during the history 
of the games. These types of annotations typically help to “teach” your reader how 
to actually understand the visual and the data it’s showing. 
For the introduction, my friend showed me a nice example on how to place the 
title and introductory paragraph side-by-side which was pretty straightforward 
to reproduce. 
As is my usual style, “Olympic Feathers” is defnitely not an “understood within 
fve seconds” chart. 
Personally, I prefer the 
more complex charts 
that don’t show very 
highly aggregated 
numbers, but the 
diversity of the details 
and even more context 
around it 

=== PAGE 72 ===
71 O LYM PI CS
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Sure, you need to get the visual encoding first, but when you do there are 
many different stories to find and insights revealed. That’s just the way I like 
my visualizations: a little bit of effort to gain a lot of insight. 
Fig.2.12Fig.2.12 
No more feather tips 
and adding subtle 
radial gradients of two 
different colors 
to make the “white 
space” of the circles 
stand out and 
distinguish between 
the genders. 
Reflections
 
Fig.2.13Fig.2.13 
(a & b)(a & b) 
Two examples of the 
annotated screenshots 
I tweeted to share new 
insights that I’d found 
about the Olympic 
medalists. 
I completed this visual in two weeks using every second of free time that I had 
in my evenings and weekends. Since I wanted to share the final result before the 
end of the Olympics, data preparation and sketching happened in the week before 
the Olympics. The programming of the visual occurred during the first week of the 
Olympics, with daily medal updates for the remainder of Rio 2016 after the visual 
came out on August 13th. Doing these daily medal updates showed me all kinds 
of new insights into (the history of) the Olympics and I shared my findings on Twitter 
with small “annotated” screenshots, such as the ones in Figure 2.13. 
August was crazy, hectic, tiring, and fun. I was already a big fan of the Olympics 
before starting, but after the insights I gained from building and investigating this 
visual, that only increased. 
aa bb 


=== PAGE 73 ===
 
Olympic Feathers 
OlympicFeathers.VisualCinnamon.com 
Fig.2.14 aFig.2.14 a 


=== PAGE 74 ===
73 
O LYM PI CS
Fig.2.14 b
Fig.2.14 b 
A zoom in on the fve circles. 

=== PAGE 75 ===
74 
NADIEH
Fig.2.15Fig.2.15 
I added two basic options for 
interactivity that would let people 
really dive into the data behind the 
visual. The frst, and most important, 
was the option to hover over each 
medal and see the details of that 
event, the Olympic edition where it 
was won, by whom (or what team), 
and if it resulted in a record. 
Fig.2.16Fig.2.16 
The second hover 
shows up when you 
mouse-over the 
bottom empty section 
of each circle where 
the year notations are. 
It would then highlight 
all of the events that 
occurred during the 
hovered edition. 

=== PAGE 76 ===
75 
O LYM PI CS
Fig.2.18
Fig.2.17Fig.2.17 
A zoom in of the circle 
focusing on water 
related sports. 
Fig.2.18 
Hovering over a Diving 
medal won by the 
UK during the 2016 
Olympics in Rio de 
Janeiro. 

=== PAGE 77 ===
[no text]

=== PAGE 78 ===
77
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
Dive Fractals 
SHIRLEY 
Ever since I was little, I’ve loved watching the summer Olympics, and out 
of all the events, I especially loved gymnastics and diving. And even though 
that’s most likely because I come from a Chinese household and they were 
the only Olympic sports we watched, I also loved them for their grace 
and beauty. 
I binged both sports during the 2016 Olympics and ended up enjoying 
synchronized diving the most. That event wasn’t around when I was a kid, 
and I marveled at the trust and respect that each partnership showed and 
at what it must take to be so in sync with each other. The divers seemed 
to be driven by a responsibility to do well for their partner and by a fear 
of letting each other down. When the teams medaled, their tearful 
embraces were beautifully emotional. 
I wanted to recreate that beauty somehow. 
AUGUST 2016 OLYM PICS 

=== PAGE 79 ===
78 
SHIRLEY
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
Fig.2.1
Data 
When I frst started brainstorming on the data, I thought I could do something 
with their scores. The women’s diving events have fve rounds and men’s have six. 
Each round consisted of a difculty score, six execution scores, and fve synchro 
scores. I wanted to get the scores of the top three teams for each event. 
After many Google searches, I could only fnd the overall scores and none 
of the breakdowns online, so I decided to gather them myself. It was absolutely 
painful; I re-watched all four synchronized diving events and manually entered all 
of the scores into a JSON fle (Figure 2.1). Not only did I have to keep pausing and 
rewinding to make sure I didn’t miss any of the teams’ scores for a round, but I had 
to be really careful about putting the array brackets in the right places (the numbers 
all started to blend together after a while). 
For a short explanation 
of JSON, or JavaScript 
Object Notation, please 
see “Technologies & 
Tools” at the beginning 
of the book. 
Fig.2.1 
The JSON data for a 
single team for a single 
event. 
One of the most 
important lessons 
I learned from Nadieh 
during my work on 
Data Sketches is to 
do my manual data 
gathering and cleaning 
in Excel or Google 
Sheets; they make 
the whole process 
I originally decided on a JSON fle because I thought I needed a nested structure go faster. 
for the score breakdowns. But in retrospect, I should have used a fat structure with 
a column for each score and Excel or Google Sheets to manage my data gathering 
process. I could then programmatically get the data into the structure I needed 
(nested or not), and I wouldn’t have had to struggle so long to make sure all the 
array brackets and decimal points were in the right places. 
It was only after I was almost done with the data gathering process that 
I'll be honest, I threw 
a ft , I threw a ft overI fnally found a page on the Rio Olympics website with the score breakdowns that one 
I was looking for. (ノಠ益ಠ)ノ彡┻━┻ 
Sketch 
Because I was traveling for the frst three weeks of the month, I knew I didn’t have 
the time to come up with diferent sketches. Thankfully, sometime during the middle 
of my trip, a friend of mine sent me a link to Yuri Vishnevsky’s experimentation with 
algorithmic art and his attempts at generating a set of unique business cards (Figure 
2.2). Some of them in particular looked like the top-down view after the divers 
entered the water, and I knew I wanted to have a similar efect for my visualization. 

=== PAGE 80 ===
79 
O LYM PI CS
 
 
 
  
 
Fig.2.2
Fig.2.3
Fig.2.2 
Yuri Vishnevsky’s 
algorithmically 
generated business 
cards. 
In the write-up for his project, Yuri didn’t provide a link to his code, but he did 
mention the term “fractal search algorithm.” A quick search for “fractal search 
algorithm javascript” led me to Dan Gries’ tutorial for “Sweeping Fractal Lines” 
(Figure 2.3). 
Gorgeous. And though it didn’t look like the water splash in Yuri’s project, 
it reminded me of silk fowing through water or of ink in water. I thought: how 
beautiful would it be if I could make the divers’ data look like this? 
Fig.2.3 
Dan Gries’ “Sweeping 
Fractal Lines.” 

=== PAGE 81 ===
80 
SHIRLEY
 
 
 
  
    
     
    
 
 
 
 
   
 
Fig.2.4
Code 
The frst few days were spent just trying to understand Dan’s code. At only ±250 
lines, it was beautiful in its brevity. As with any piece of code I wanted to understand, 
I printed out all the lines and went through them line by line: 
Fig.2.4 
A printout of Dan’s 
code with my notes. 
(I can’t say that my 
notes are the most 
coherent.) 
The key was to understand enough of what was going on to be able to replace the 
randomly generated data with my diving data. After the frst day, I was able to boil 
it down to two key functions: 
∙ setLinePoints implements the “fractal subdivision process,” which takes 
This is very similar to 
how I generated thea line, recursively divides it in the middle, and varies the y -position of that mid- watercolor efect in my
point. This programmatically creates a “squiggly” line. “Nature” chapter. 
∙ onTimer is called on every page repaint (triggered 
by requestAnimationFrame , a browser method for animation) and does 
most of the heavy lifting: it is passed two of the “squiggly” lines, one for 
starting, and one for ending. On every repaint, it slowly “morphs” (interpolates) 
from the starting to ending line, drawing to canvas as it goes. And as soon 
as it hits the ending line, it assigns the ending line as the new starting lines, 
generates a new ending line with setLinePoints , and starts over. 
This happens until it hits the edge of the screen. 

=== PAGE 82 ===
81 
O LYM PI CS
 
    
 
  
   
 
 
  
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
Fig.2.5Fig.2.5 
My frst attempt at 
creating sweeping 
fractals which turned 
out disjointed (left), 
and my second attempt 
which turned out 
correctly (right). 
From there, I knew how I wanted to map my data: 
∙ Each round would be a distinct starting line generated with 
setLinePoints 
∙ The radius of each circle is denoted by the difculty score of that round’s dive 
∙ The height between each starting and ending line is the score the divers 
received for that round 
∙ The colors are the two primary colors on that team’s country fag 
I thought this mapping would help me compare both the difculty of each dive 
(radius) and overall score (height) of each team. 
My frst attempt at adapting Dan’s code took a while and didn’t turn out quite 
as I expected. I understood setLinePoints quite well and thus was able 
to use the divers’ execution scores to generate the “squiggly” circles, but didn’t 
understand some of the key parts of onTimer . And because onTimer took care 
of actually drawing the circles, I ended up with disjointed lines (Figure 2.5 , left). 
Not quite what I was expecting. I wasn’t grasping how Dan was interpolating 
the shapes of the curves, creating the weird discontinuity between sections. 
I knew then that I had to re-implement Dan’s code in a way that I could understand. 
So I kept most of Dan’s code from setLinePoints, but completely rewrote and 
separated onTimer into three separate functions: the frst function to transition 
from each starting line to the next using a custom D3.jsinterpolator, the second 
to convert the “squiggly” line to a circle, and a third to draw the circle to canvas. 
This worked marvelously (Figure 2.5, right). 
For guidance on 
interpolators in 
animation, check out 
the lesson “Custom 
Animations” on page 
269 of my “Nature” 
chapter. For translating 
lines to circles, 
refer to the lesson 
“Trigonometry” 
on page 109 of my 
“Travel” chapter. 


=== PAGE 83 ===
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’
SVG vs. Canvas 
I think of DOM, or 
Document Object 
Model, as the way the 
browser keeps track 
of all the elements 
(divs and spans 
being the most 
common) that need 
to be rendered or 
styled in a webpage. 
For an introduction 
to SVG, see the 
“Drawing with SVG” 
lesson on page 50 
of my “Movies” 
chapter. 
For a short explanation 
of React.js and Vue.js, 
see “Technologies & 
Tools” at the beginning 
of the book. 
SVG and the Canvas API are the two most common ways of drawing shapes on a web page, 
and they both have their pros and cons—mostly around usability and performance. 
With SVG, each shape is represented as an individual DOM element in the browser. 
I can set attributes to position and size the shape, set styles, and register event listeners 
(hover, click, etc.) on it. 
SVG is the best for visualizing a dataset that 
doesn’t need to update and registering some 
basic user interactions like click and hover. 
Once I have to update the visualization to refect updates in the data, using SVG becomes more 
complicated. I have to keep track of which new SVG elements need to be created and inserted 
into the DOM, which need to be removed, and which elements’ attributes have to be updated; 
D3.js s “enter-update-exit” pattern helps manage this, but even that can get complex and 
error-prone. In those situations with a smaller dataset but complicated updates, I like to use 
SVG with React.js
 or Vue.js managing the DOM. But once I have a bigger dataset and need 
to draw and animate more than a thousand SVG elements in the DOM, I like to use the Canvas 
API instead. 

=== PAGE 84 ===
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Canvas, unlike SVG, is just one DOM element (which makes it more performant and 
recommended for large datasets). We draw shapes within canvas with a series of JavaScript 
commands, and once they’re drawn, we no longer have access to the shapes. This is because 
canvas has no notion of individual shapes (as the shapes aren’t individual DOM elements) 
and instead keeps track of each pixel and its RGB values to draw the image. 
And even though canvas requires more code to get started (especially when drawing 
more complex shapes), once we have the code to draw the initial dataset, updating is much 
easier; we clear the canvas and redraw with the new dataset. On the other hand, because 
canvas doesn’t track individual shapes, handling animations and user interactions is trickier 
(but still doable). 
In general, I prefer canvas when I’m creating 
complex, interactive visualizations that animate 
because it’s so much more performant. 
SVG Canvas 
Pro Easy to get started Very performant 
Easy to register user interactions Easy to update 
Easy to animate 
Cons Potentially complex DOM updates More work to get started 
Not performant for large number More work to handle interactions 
of elements Have to write custom animations 
I think of them 
as SVG is like Illustrator 
and canvas is like 
Photoshop. 
For guidance 
on how to implement 
animations in canvas, 
see lesson “Custom 
Animations” on page 
269 of my “Nature” 
chapter. For how 
to handle user 
interactions, see lesson 
“Canvas Interactions” 
on page 181 of my 
“Books” chapter. 

=== PAGE 85 ===
84 
SHIRLEY
  
 
  
 
  
  
Fig.2.6
Fig.2.7
And just for fun, I also made it animate like Dan’s did, but with d3.timer() 
(an abstraction on top of requestAnimationFrame ) instead: 
Fig.2.6 
My version of the 
sweeping fractal lines, 
animated. 
Fig.2.7 
Sweeping fractal lines 
for each of the teams 
and events. 
I then refactored my code to be able to show and animate multiple fows instead 
of the single one I was prototyping with, with each fow representing one team’s 
data (Figure 2.7). My happiest moment was getting the animation working for 
all of the fows, and having the animation’s duration depend on the height of the 
)و ̀fow instead of a set duration (I’m all about these small wins. 


=== PAGE 86 ===
85 
O LYM PI CS
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.2.8
Up until this point, I had been using Block Builder to prototype the visuals. 
But now that it looked how I wanted, it was time to add some structure and 
polish. As a front-end engineer, I tend to think in terms of components, so I moved 
my code into React.js. I put each diving event (with three teams, ordered 
by their position on the podium: Silver, Gold, and Bronze) into a component so that 
I could annotate them together with event name, team information, and score for 
each round (Figure 2.8). 
To fnish, I added a title, description, and a hover interaction where I displayed 
more detailed score breakdown for that round. 
Block Builder is a now 
deprecated in-browser 
code editor for 
creating and sharing 
D3.js examples. 
Fig.2.8 
The sweeping fractal 
lines for the women’s 
teams, annotated. 
 Reflections 
When I frst fnished this project, I felt it left a lot to be desired. I wanted to add more 
annotations to highlight incredible and emotional moments in each event, because 
those were what made the events beautiful to watch for me. I had links to videos 
of those moments, but ran out of time to incorporate them. I was also hoping the 
visual would look like silk fowing in the water, but I got something that to me looked 
more like smoke billowing in the wind. As a data visualization, it was hard to compare 
anything other than height (and thus, overall score) between the diferent teams; 
it lacked detailed insights. And as a web project, it was hardly performant: there was 
a delay whenever I hovered over an annotation. 
Now I like it a lot more. It taught me a very important lesson: we’ll have good 
projects and bad projects, but the act of fnishing is an important one (that piece 
of wisdom is from Nadieh). I pushed through the technical challenges and fnished, 
and the aesthetic that bothered me so much back then—the billowing smokestack— 
has grown on me. I now think it looks beautiful! It was also, unknowingly, one of my 
frst forays into data art, and I’m glad I challenged myself to make something more 
unorthodox, because it has since given me the courage to keep experimenting. 

=== PAGE 87 ===
 
Dive Fractals 
shirleywu.studio/projects/olympics 


=== PAGE 88 ===
87 
O LYM PI CS
 
 
Fig.2.10
Fig.2.9
Fig.2.10 
Hovering displays more 
detailed score breakdown, 
and clicking flters all fows 
by that round. 
Fig.2.9 
The fnal visualization 
of the synchronized dives. 
The women’s events are 
shorter because they only 
have fve rounds instead 
of the mens’ six. Each 
sweeping fractal line 
is colored by the team’s 
country fag. I love seeing 
how close the scores 
ended up being for the 
men’s 3m springboard and 
the women’s 10m platform. 


=== PAGE 89 ===
88 
TRA 

=== PAGE 90 ===
89 
TRAVEL 

=== PAGE 91 ===
A
anuary March May July September November
California
ce an
Living in the Bay 
Started working 
Finished this visual! 
Berlin - Prague - Austria 
Florida 
France 
California 
Beijing - Australia 
Turkey 
 France 
Turkey 
 Lassen NP 
Lake Tahoe 
 Yosemite & Sequoia NP 
Los Angeles 
Norway 
Portugal 
Turkey 
London 
 New England (US) & Toronto (CA) 
Turkey 
Kenya & Tanzania 
Turkey 
Finland 
Japan 
Alaska (US) & Yukon (CA) 
Spain 
I l d 
Myanmar 
    
 
  
    
  
 
    
 
     
  
    

=== PAGE 92 ===
y A
ng
 
 
   
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 My Life in 
Vacations 
NADIEH 
For me, this topic became more about the data gathering aspects 
than the visual. I truly love being able to travel and see the wonders 
of our world and I’m extremely grateful that I have the opportunity 
to do so. I spend hours upon hours planning beforehand—searching 
for the most beautiful, unique, and amazing places to sleep—and 
I book them weeks in advance. (Vacations are really the only thing 
that I splurge on, and we all need something to splurge on right?) 
Even before I was old enough to plan my vacations, for the frst 10 
years of my life my parents took me along each summer in our cute 
caravan to enjoy the warm summers of France. The idea of mapping 
out my vacations (when, where, and with whom) was immediately 
fxed in my mind. 
SEPTEMBER 2016 91 TRAVEL 

=== PAGE 93 ===
92 
NADIEH
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  Fig.3.1 a b
(a & b)
Fig.3.2
Data 
Since it’s (sadly) natural to forget things from your own childhood, I frst needed 
to consult a reputable source to create the data for the frst ±10 years of my life: 
my mother. She has the long-term memory of an elephant. It was quite fun 
to discuss distant memories from my childhood with her, and together we managed 
to get a good starting vacation list. I then went to my dad’s place to browse through 
Yup, my pre-teens 
old vacation photos. It took me approximately 4–5 hours to sort all the photos 
my dad had by year and month (the printing month and year were thankfully written 
were still in the mostly 
analog world. 
on the backs of most photos), and another four hours to cross-reference the 
vacation photos with the list my mom and I put together, and put them in a folder 
corresponding to year. And as an added bonus, this project has now resulted 
in a nicely sorted box of my childhood photos (Figure 3.1). 
From age 12, I started to keep journals from these trips, writing in whatever 
notebook I could fnd. By combining the journals and the ticket stubs of as many 
museums and tours I could fnd, I was able to pinpoint exactly where I had gone 
and when (Figure 3.2). 
We got a digital camera in 2004 and I could use each photo’s metadata 
I included vacations 
to identify exactly when the photo was taken. I eventually ended up with a fle where I didn’t stay at 
home and that weren’t 
containing all kinds of metadata about each of my vacations. business trips abroad. 
Fig.3.1 a b 
(a & b) 
The diferent sorting 
stages of getting 
through my childhood 
photos. 
Fig.3.2 
Part of my collection 
of travel diaries and 
journals which helped 
me fnd exact travel 
dates and destinations. 


=== PAGE 94 ===
93 
TRAVEL
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.3.3
Manually Add New Variables 
to Your Data 
As this was a project related to me personally, all of the variables had to be manually 
created. It took some efort to gather all of the information I needed, but it did provide 
me with a dataset that I was totally enthusiastic about representing visually! 
Sketch 
My idea this time was a very simple one. Each year since I’ve been born would be 
one row and the periods in which I went on vacation would be a colored rectangle 
and annotated. However, I wanted to play around with diferent kinds of annotations 
to make it easier to see trends; where I went, with whom, how we got there, what 
was the main purpose, things like that. The sketch in Figure 3.3 was my frst attempt 
at creating these annotations. 
Fig.3.3 
A row per year with 
colored blocks during 
the periods that I was 
on vacation. 
But I quickly realized that what I was sketching was a poor refection of reality. 
There are 52 weeks in a year, and typically I’m on vacation during a maximum of fve 
of those weeks—a lot! I know, but objectively it’s less than 10% of a year. Therefore, 
if I were to create this visual, less than 1/10th of a row would be colored, translating 
to a visualization with a lot of white space and a few tiny colored blocks in between. 
I started thinking of ways to give the vacation weeks more space and I was 
reminded of the way time zones run across the Earth: from North to South pole, and 
not at all in a straight line. Maybe I could also squeeze the months in which I wasn’t 
on vacation in that year (Figure 3.4)? Yes, that would mean that the months wouldn’t 
align perfectly anymore, making it pretty darn difcult to compare exact months 
across the years. But I was more interested in seeing trends between vacations than 
getting a perfect overview of the periods in which I was away. 

=== PAGE 95 ===
94 
NADIEH
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.3.4Fig.3.4 
Sketching the idea 
of squishing a month 
in which I hadn’t been 
on vacation. 
Sketch to Discover and Remove 
Thinking Errors 
Starting of your visualizations with a simple paper-and-pen sketch can help 
you spot whether your idea will actually work with your dataset and allow you 
to iterate quickly. By sketching out my simple design of colored blocks per row 
I could quickly assess that my initial idea wouldn’t represent the data in a good 
way visually. Furthermore, sketching also helped me to come up with the new 
approach of squishing some months. 
Code 
Even though the idea was simple in theory, the data collection and execution 
required more time in practice, with a lot of custom code. The frst step was getting 
those vacation rectangles in the right location. Due to the introduction of the 
“squeezed months” concept, and centering the year around August (my typical 
vacation month), it took me at least 30 iterations before I had the math and loops 
in my code working correctly (Figure 3.5). 
Connecting all the months by a line was less trivial than I expected. It took 
many iterations before I was happy with the curving of the lines in between the 
years. (The one in Figure 3.6, although not useful, was defnitely my favorite.) 

=== PAGE 96 ===
95 
TRAVEL
(b)
  Fig.3.5
(a & b)
Fig.3.6
aa bb 
Fig.3.5 
(a & b) 
Two iterations of getting the 
vacation rectangles in the 
correct horizontal location. 
Fig.3.6 
Some wonky results for the 
month dividing lines. 

=== PAGE 97 ===
96 
NADIEH
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.3.7
Fig.3.8
Fig.3.7 
The diferent types 
of vacation patterns 
and icons inside the 
rectangles and people 
icons on top of the 
rectangles. 
Fig.3.8 
The diferent types of 
blurry flters applied to 
the vacation rectangles 
to denote either an 
unknown start and end 
date, not remembering 
how much I enjoyed 
the vacation, or both. 
Next up were the shapes inside the vacations representing the purpose 
of my travels, such as “culture” or “nature.” I was trying to go for easy-to-decipher 
patterns that would be understandable without referring to the legend. After trying 
out a few diferent techniques I found it easiest to create a small line chart or icon 
on top of each rectangle. For example, the pattern on top of “nature” vacations 
is nothing more than a randomly drawn line. It’s diferent for each rectangle and 
on each refresh. The house-like pattern for my “cultural” vacations always uses the 
same setup of lines until it reaches the end of the rectangle. The “sun” and “snow” 
icons were made from basic shapes, a bit of trigonometry, and a for-loop. However, 
the “Mickey Mouse,” “Olympic torch,” and “safari animal” icons were too complex 
to make with code. I made them in Adobe Illustrator, saved the tiny SVGs, and loaded 
them onto their respective rectangles. 
I made the pattern of 
lines for the “culture” 
vacations long enough 
to ft the longest 
rectangle. 
Moving on to the annotation of “who I was with” on top of each rectangle, the fnal 
icons are actually pretty similar to my frst sketch: my boyfriend is represented 
by a heart, my dad is a blue circle, and my mom a pink small circle with a downward 
swoosh. Since this entire visual is already very personal, I didn’t mind the exact icons 
relating to something that only I would understand. 
Initially, I was using a gradient for the vacations I didn’t have exact dates for 
in order to fade the ends out a bit. However, I wasn’t sure what to use for vacations 
where I couldn’t remember how much I enjoyed it, being too young at the time. The 
problem is that you can only apply one gradient to an SVG element. That’s until I read 
one of Shirley’s write-ups again and she talks about the motion blur flter, and I was 
like: of course, I wrote a whole tutorial on that —how could I forget! So I replaced the 
gradient with the blur flter. The nice thing is that you can set it up to blur in either 
horizontal, vertical, or both directions. I did fnd that the vacations in my early youth, 
where both the duration and enjoyment are blurred, are a bit like vague spots (Figure 
3.8), but then Shirley said that this was a nice metaphor to how I remember them, 
just blurry pieces (or nothing at all), which is absolutely true indeed. 


=== PAGE 98 ===
97 
TRAVEL
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
Fig.3.9Fig.3.9 
Two of the small icon-
based annotations 
that I added to the 
visual to denote the big 
events in my life: doing 
an exchange at the 
University of California 
Berkeley and living 
in the Bay Area, and 
starting to work after 
graduating. 
The fnal visual touch, apart from a legend, were the textual and icon-based 
annotations along the sides to explain the visual and a few major life events 
(Figure 3.9). Due to all of these custom touches—such as the icons, the patterns, 
the legend, the annotations to help people understand my life through vacations 
more—I fnally came to the point where this project had more lines of code than 
my previous project about the Olympics. Not such a simple project after all! 
(╥﹏╥) 
I kept the interactions to a minimum, limiting it to help the viewer understand 
the most difcult aspect of the viz: diferentiating between months, due to all the 
squeezing going on. There’s only a small hover that highlights the same month 
throughout the years in light grey. 
In the end the fnal visual became quite long, a bit like those long-form 
infographic monsters that were all the rage a few years ago. But it also reminds 
me a bit of a children’s book; simple with bright colors, easy icons, and a bit 
of text every now and then. 
Reflections 
With the amount of code and hours that this project still required, I wonder 
if I should’ve gone for a more complicated sketch/idea that would’ve looked more 
visually appealing (but would still take the same amount of time). By comparison, 
this one just looks simple. But as Shirley stated in her previous project, we wouldn’t 
be super proud of every visual we created during Data Sketches. I really wanted 
to try out this idea where you got a more general sense of time rather than seeing 
time as fxed, and give the vacations themselves more room to exist. I’ll leave 
it up to you to decide if that was a good choice in the end. 
What I do like is that I’ve never made a visual with such personal data before. 
So maybe it’s not that interesting visually for other people to look at, but for 
me personally it has a special place in my heart. 
( ˘ ³˘)ノ°ﾟ°❍

=== PAGE 99 ===
 
Fig.3.11
Fig.3.10
My Life in Vacations 
Vacations.VisualCinnamon.com 
Fig.3.11 
Zooming in on a section 
generally between June 
and September, from 2006 
and 2013. 
Fig.3.10 
On a hover, the same month 
is highlighted across all years 
with a grey area 

=== PAGE 100 ===
99 
TRAVEL
 
 
Fig.3.12
Fig.3.13
Fig.3.14 Fig.3.15
Fig.3.12 
On a hover, the same 
month is highlighted across 
all years with a grey area 
(July in this case). 
Fig.3.13 
I had two vacations 
planned for the months 
after fnishing this visual 
and therefore didn’t 
know how much I would 
enjoy them 
Fig.3.14 
The legend explaining 
what every added 
visual touch to a 
“vacation rectangle” 
means. 
Fig.3.15 
A sun vacation during 
July/ August was the 
only type of vacation 
that happened in the 
frst 10 years of my life. 