ο

ο

ο

ο

126

6. Rules of Thumb

Total KW consumption ECN 

KW 

17 dec. 

12 nov. 

8 oct. 

3 sep. 

2000 

1600 

1200 

800 

400 

0 

KW 

30 jul. 

25 jun. 

21 may 

days 

24:00 

18:00 

5 feb. 

1 jan. 

0:00 

12:00 

6:00 

hours 

16 apr. 

12 mar. 

(a) 

Figure 6.7.  3D versus 2D. (a) A 3D representation of this time-series dataset introduces the problems of occlusion 
and  perspective  distortion.  (b)  The  linked  2D  views  of  derived  aggregate  curves  and  the  calendar  allow  direct 
comparison and show more ﬁne-grained patterns. From [van Wijk and van Selow 99, Figures 1 and 4].

(b) 

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

6.3. No Unjustiﬁed 3D

127

‣  Linked  views  are  dis-
cussed in Chapter 12. 

related  sets  of  measurements:  the  number  of  people  inside  and  amount 
of  power  used  in  an  ofﬁce  building,  with  measurements  over  the  course 
of  each  day  for  one  full  year.  The  authors  compare  a  straightforward  3D 
representation with a carefully designed approach using linked 2D views, 
which  avoids  the  problems  of  occlusion  and  perspective  distortion.  Fig-
ure  6.7(a)  shows  the  straightforward  3D  representation  created  directly 
from the original time-series data,  where each cross-section is a 2D time 
series  curve showing  power  consumption  for  one  day,  with  one  curve  for 
each day of the year along the extruded third axis.  Only very large-scale 
patterns  such  as  the  higher  consumption  during  working  hours  and  the 
seasonal variation between winter and summer are visible.

The  ﬁnal  vis  designed  by  the  authors  uses  multiple  linked  2D  views 
and a different data abstraction.  They created the derived data of a hier-
archical  clustering  of  the  time-series  curves  through  an  iterative  process 
where the most similar curves are merged together into a cluster that can 
be represented by the average of the curves within it. 

Figure  6.7(b)  shows  a  single  aggregate  curve  for  each  of  the  highest-
level  groups  in  the  clustering  in  the  window  on  the  right  of  the  display. 
There  are  few  enough  of  these  aggregate  curves  that  they  can  all  be  su-
perimposed  in  the  same  2D  image  without  excessive  visual  clutter.  Di-
rect comparison between the curve heights at all times of the day is easy 
because  there  is  no  perspective  distortion  or  occlusion. 
(The  cluster – 
calendar vis shows the number of people in the building, rather than the 
power consumption of the 3D extruded vis.) 

On  the  left  side  of  Figure  6.7(b)  is  a  calendar  view.  Calendars  are  a 
very traditional and successful way to show temporal patterns.  The views 
are  linked  with  shared  color  coding.  The  same  large-scale  patterns  of 
seasonal variation between summer and winter that can be seen in 3D are 
still very visible, but smaller-scale patterns that are difﬁcult or impossible 
to spot in the 3D view are also revealed.  In this Dutch calendar, weeks are 
vertical strips with the weekend at the bottom.  We can identify weekends 
and holidays as the nearly ﬂat teal curve where nobody is in the building, 
and normal weekdays as the topmost tan curve with a full house. Summer 
and Fridays during the winter are the brown curve with one hundred fewer 
people,  and  Fridays  in  the  summer  are  the  green  curve  with  nearly  half 
of the employees gone.  The blue and magenta curves show days between 
holiday times where most people also take vacation.  The red curve shows 
the  unique  Dutch  holiday  of  Santa  Claus  day,  where  everybody  gets  to 
leave work an hour early. 

While unbridled enthusiasm for 3D is no longer common, there 
are indeed situations where its use is justiﬁable even for abstract 
data.

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

128

6. Rules of Thumb

Example: Layer-Oriented Time-Series Vis 

Figure  6.8  shows  an  example  that  is  similar  on  the  surface  to  the  pre-
vious  one,  but  in  this  case  3D  is  used  with  care  and  the  design  is  well 
justiﬁed  [Lopez-Hernandez  et  al.  10].  In  this  system  for  visualizing  os-
cilloscope time-series data,  the user starts by viewing the data using the 
traditional  eye  diagram  where  the  signal  is  wrapped  around  in  time  and 
shown  as  many  overlapping  traces.  Users  can  spread  the  traces  apart 
using the metaphor of opening a drawer, as shown in Figure 6.8(a).  This 
drawer interface does use 3D, but with many constraints.  Layers are or-
thographically projected and always face the viewer. Navigation complexity 
is controlled by automatically zooming and framing as the user adjusts the 
drawer’s orientation, as shown in Figure 6.8(b). 

(a) 

(b) 

Figure 6.8. Careful use of 3D. (a) The user can evolve the view from the traditional 
overlapping eye diagram with the metaphor of opening a drawer.  (b) The interac-
tion is carefully designed to avoid the difﬁculties of unconstrained 3D navigation. 
From [Lopez-Hernandez et al. 10, Figures 3 and 7].

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

6.3. No Unjustiﬁed 3D

129

6.3.9  Empirical Evidence 

Empirical  experiments  are  critical  in  understanding  user  perfor-
mance, especially because of the well-documented dissociation be-
tween  stated  preference  for  3D  and  actual  task  performance  [An-
dre and Wickens 95].  Experimental evidence suggests that 3D in-
terfaces are better for shape understanding,  whereas 2D are best 
for  relative  position  tasks:  those  that  require  judging  the  precise 
distances  and  angles  between  objects  [St.  John  et  al.  01].  Most 
tasks  involving  abstract  data  do  not  beneﬁt  from  3D;  for  exam-
ple,  an  experiment  comparing  3D  cone  trees  to  an  equivalent  2D 
tree  browser  found  that  the  3D  interaction  had  a  signiﬁcant  time 
cost [Cockburn and McKenzie 00]. 

Designing  controlled  experiments  that  untangle  the  efﬁcacy  of 
speciﬁc interfaces that use 3D can be tricky.  Sometimes the goal 
of the experimenter is simply to compare two alternative interfaces 
that differ in many ways; in such cases it is dangerous to conclude 
that  if  an  interface  that  happens  to  be  3D  outperforms  another 
that  happens  to  be  2D,  it  is  the  use  of  3D  that  made  the  differ-
ence.  In several cases,  earlier study results that were interpreted 
as showing beneﬁts for 3D were superseded by more careful exper-
imental design that eliminated uncontrolled factors.  For example, 
the 3D Data Mountain interface for organizing web page thumbnail 
images  was  designed  to  exploit  human  spatial  cognition  and  was 
shown to outperform the standard 2D Favorites display in Internet 
Explorer  [Robertson  et  al.  98].  However,  this  study  left  open  the 
question of whether the beneﬁt was from the use of 3D or the use 
of the data mountain visual encoding, namely, a spatial layout al-
lowing immediate access to every item in each pile of information. 
A  later  study  compared  two  versions  of  Data  Mountain,  one  with 
3D perspective and one in 2D, and no performance beneﬁt for 3D 
was found [Cockburn and McKenzie 01]. 

Another  empirical  study  found  no  beneﬁts  for  3D  landscapes 
created  to  reﬂect  the  density  of  a  2D  point  cloud,  compared  with 
simply  showing  the  point  cloud  in  2D  [Tory  et  al.  07].  In  the  3D 
information landscape idiom, the density of the points on the plane 
is computed as a derived attribute and used to construct a surface 
whose  height  varies  according  to  this  attribute  in  order  to  show 
its value in a form similar to geographic terrain.*  A third alterna-
tive to landscapes or points is a contour plot, where colored bands 
show  the  outlines  of  speciﬁc  heights.  A  contour  plot  can  be  used 
alone as a 2D landscape or can be combined with 3D for a colored 
landscape.  Proponents of this idiom have argued that landscapes

*  Other  names  for  a  3D 
landscape  are  height  ﬁeld 
and terrain. 

‣  Contour  plots  are  dis-
cussed in Section 8.4.1.

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

130

6. Rules of Thumb

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d) 

(e)

(f)

(g) 

Figure 6.9.  Point-based displays were found to outperform information landscapes in an empirical study of visual 
encodings for dimensionally reduced data.  (a) Colored points.  (b) Grayscale points.  (c) Colored 2D landscape. 
(d) Grayscale 2D landscape.  (e) Colored 3D landscape.  (f) Grayscale 3D landscape.  (g) Height only.  From [Tory 
et al. 07, Figure 1]. 

‣  Dimensionality  reduction 
in  Section 
is  discussed 
13.4.3. 

are familiar and engaging, and they have been used in several sys-
tems for displaying high-dimensional data after dimensionality re-
duction was used to reduce to two synthetic dimensions [Davidson 
et al. 01, Wise et al. 95].

Figure 6.9 shows the seven possibilities tested in the empirical 
study comparing points to colored and uncolored landscapes.  The 
ﬁndings were that points were far superior to landscapes for search 
and  point  estimation  tasks  and  in  the  landscape  case  2D  land-
scapes  were  superior  to  3D  landscapes  [Tory  et  al.  07].  A  follow-
up  study  for  a  visual  memory  task  yielded  similar  results  [Tory 
et al. 09].

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

6.4. No Unjustiﬁed 2D

131

6.4  No Unjustiﬁed 2D 

Laying out data in 2D space should also be explicitly justiﬁed, com-
pared  with  the  alternative  of  simply  showing  the  data  with  a  1D 
list. 

Lists have several strengths.  First, they can show the maximal 
amount  of  information,  such  as  text  labels,  in  minimal  space.  In 
contrast, 2D layouts such as node–link representations of network 
data require considerably more space to show the same number of 
labels, so they have notably lower information density. 

Second,  lists  are  excellent  for  lookup  tasks  when  they  are  or-
dered  appropriately,  for  example  in  alphabetical  order  when  the 
goal  is  to  ﬁnd  a  known  label.  In  contrast,  ﬁnding  a  speciﬁc  label 
in  a  2D  node–link  representation  might  require  the  user  to  hunt 
around the entire layout, unless a speciﬁc search capability is built 
into the vis tool. 

When  the  task  truly  requires  understanding  the  topological 
structure of the network,  then the beneﬁts of showing those rela-
tionships explicitly outweigh the cost of the space required.  How-
ever, some tasks are handled well by linear lists, even if the original 
data has network structure. 

6.5  Eyes Beat Memory 

Using  our  eyes  to  switch  between  different  views  that  are  visible 
simultaneously has much lower cognitive load than consulting our 
memory  to  compare  a  current  view  with  what  was  seen  before. 
Many interaction idioms implicitly rely on the internal use of mem-
ory  and  thus  impose  cognitive  load  on  the  viewer.  Consider  navi-
gation within a single view, where the display changes to show the 
scene  from  a  different  viewpoint.  Maintaining  a  sense  of  orienta-
tion implicitly relies on using internal resources, either by keeping 
track  of  past  navigation  choices  (for  example,  I  zoomed  into  the 
nucleus) or by remembering past views (for example, earlier all the 
stock options in the tech sector were in the top corner of the view).  In 
contrast,  having  a  small  overview  window  with  a  rectangle  within 
it showing the position and size of the current camera viewport for 
the main view is a way to show that information through an exter-
nal representation easily consulted by looking at that region of the 
screen, so that it can be read off by the perceptual system instead 
of remembered.

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

132

6. Rules of Thumb

6.5.1  Memory and Attention 

Broadly  speaking,  people  have  two  different  categories  of  mem-
ory:  long-term memory that can last a lifetime, versus short-term 
memory  that  lasts  several  seconds,  also  known  as  working mem-
ory.  While the capacity of long-term memory doesn’t have a strict 
upper  limit,  human  working  memory  is  a  very  limited  resource. 
When  these  limits  are  reached,  people  experience  cognitive  load 
and will fail to absorb all of the information that is presented. 

Human  attention  also  has  severe  limits.  Conscious  search  for 
items  is  an  operation  that  grows  more  difﬁcult  with  the  number 
of  items  there  are  to  be  checked.  Vigilance  is  also  a  highly  lim-
ited resource:  our ability to perform visual search tasks degrades 
quickly, with far worse results after several hours than in the ﬁrst 
few minutes. 

6.5.2  Animation versus Side-by-Side Views 

Some animation-based idioms also impose signiﬁcant cognitive load 
on the viewer because of implicit memory demands.  Animation is 
an  overloaded  word  that  can  mean  many  different  things  consid-
ered through the lens of vis encoding and interaction.  I distinguish 
between these three deﬁnitions: 

.  narrative storytelling, as in popular movies; 

.  transitions from just one state to another; 

.  video-style  playback  of  a  multiframe  sequence:  play,  pause, 

stop, rewind, and step forward/back. 

Some  people  have  the  intuition  that  because  animation  is  a 
powerful storytelling medium for popular movies, it should also be 
suitable in a vis context.  However, the situation is quite different. 
Successful  storytelling  requires  careful  and  deliberate  choreogra-
phy to ensure that action is only occurring in one place at a time 
and  the  viewer’s  eyes  have  been  guided  to  ensure  that  they  are 
looking in the right place.  In contrast,  a dataset animation might 
have simultaneous changes in many parts of the view. 

Animation is extremely powerful when used for transitions be-
tween two dataset conﬁgurations because it helps the user main-
tain context.  There is considerable evidence that animated transi-
tions can be more effective than jump cuts, because they help peo-
ple track changes in object positions or camera viewpoints.  These

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

6.5. Eyes Beat Memory

133

transitions  are  most  useful  when  only  a  few  things  change;  if  the 
number of objects that change between frames is large, people will 
have  a  hard  time  tracking  everything  that  occurs.  We  are  blind 
to  changes  in  regions  of  the  image  that  are  not  the  focus  of  our 
attention. 

Although  jump  cuts  are  hard  to  follow  when  only  seen  once, 
giving the user control of jumping back and forth between just two 
frames  can  be  effective  for  detecting  whether  there  is  a  localized 
change between two scenes.  This blink comparator idiom was used 
by the astronomer who found Pluto. 

Finally,  I  consider  animations  as  sequences  of  many  frames, 
where  the  viewer  can  control  the  playback  using  video-style  con-
trols  of  play,  pause,  stop,  rewind,  and  sometimes  single-step  for-
ward  or  backward  frame  by  frame.  I  distinguish  animation  from 
true interactive control,  for example,  navigation by ﬂying through 
a  scene.  With  animation  the  user  does  not  directly  control  what 
occurs, only the speed at which the animation is played. 

The difﬁculty of multiframe animations is that making compar-
isons between frames that do not adjoin relies on internal memory 
of what previous frames looked like.  If changes only occur in one 
place at a time, the demands on attention and internal memory are 
small.  However, when many things change all over the frame and 
there  are  many  frames,  we  have  a  very  difﬁcult  time  in  tracking 
what  happens.  Giving  people  the  ability  to  pause  and  replay  the 
animation is much better than only seeing it a single time straight 
through, but that control does not fully solve the problem. 

For  tasks  requiring  detailed  comparison  across  many  frames, 
seeing  all  the  frames  at  once  side  by  side  can  be  more  effective 
than  animation.  The  number  of  frames  must  be  small  enough 
that  the  details  within  each  can  be  discerned,  so  this  approach 
is  typically  suitable  for  dozens  but  not  hundreds  of  frames  with 
current display resolutions.  The action also should be segmented 
into meaningful chunks, rather than keyframes that are randomly 
chosen.  Many  vis  idioms  that  use  multiple  views  exploit  this  ob-
servation, especially small multiples. 

6.5.3  Change Blindness 

The human visual system works by querying the world around us 
using our eyes.  Our visual system works so well that most people 
have  the  intuition  that  we  have  detailed  internal  memory  of  the 
visual ﬁeld that surrounds us.  However, we do not.  Our eyes dart 
around, gathering information just in time for our need to use it, so

‣ Change blindness is cov-
ered in Section 6.5.3. 

‣  Small  multiples  are  cov-
ered in Section 12.3.2. 

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

134

6. Rules of Thumb

quickly that we do not typically notice this motion at a conscious 
level. 

The  phenomenon  of  change blindness  is  that  we  fail  to  notice 
even  quite  drastic  changes  if  our  attention  is  directed  elsewhere. 
For example,  experimenters set up a real-world interaction where 
somebody  was  engaged  by  a  stranger  who  asked  directions,  only 
to be interrupted by people carrying a door who barged in between 
them.  The experimenters orchestrated a switch during this visual 
interruption,  replacing  the  questioner  with  another  person.  Re-
markably,  most  people  did  not  notice,  even  when  the  new  ques-
tioner  was  dressed  completely  differently—or  was  a  different  gen-
der than the old one! 

Although  we  are  very  sensitive  to  changes  at  the  focus  of  our 
attention, we are surprisingly blind to changes when our attention 
is not engaged.  The difﬁculty of tracking complex and widespread 
changes across multiframe animations is one of the implications of 
change blindness for vis. 

6.6  Resolution over Immersion 

Pixels are precious:  if you are faced with a trade-off between reso-
lution and immersion, resolution usually is far more important. 

Immersive  environments  emphasize  simulating  realistic  inter-
action  and  perception  as  closely  as  possible  through  technology 
such  as  stereo  imagery  delivered  separately  to  each  eye  to  en-
hance  depth  perception,  and  full  six-degree-of-freedom  head  and 
position  tracking  so  that  the  displays  respond  immediately  to  the 
user’s  physical  motion  of  walking  and  moving  the  head  around. 
The  most  common  display  technology  is  head-mounted  displays, 
or  small  rooms  with  rear-projection  displays  on  walls,  ﬂoor,  and 
ceilings.  Immersion  is  most  useful  when  a  sense  of  presence  is 
an  important  aspect  of  the  intended  task.  With  current  display 
hardware,  there  is  a  trade-off  between  resolution,  the  number  of 
available  pixels  divided  by  the  display  area,  and  immersion,  the 
feeling  of  presence  in  virtual  reality.  The  price  of  immersion  is 
resolution;  these  displays  cannot  show  as  many  pixels  as  state-
of-the-art desktop displays of the equivalent area.  The number of 
pixels  available  on  a  computer  display  is  a  limited  resource  that 
is  usually  the  most  critical  constraint  in  vis  design.  Thus,  it  is 
extremely rare that immersion is worth the cost in resolution. 

Another  price  of  immersion  is  the  integration  of  vis  with  the 
rest  of  a  user’s  typical  computer-based  workﬂow.  Immersive  dis-

‣  Display  resolution  con-
straints  are  discussed  in 
Section 1.13. 

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

6.7. Overview First, Zoom and Filter, Details on Demand

135

play environments are almost always special-purpose settings that 
are a different physical location than the user’s workspace, requir-
ing them to leave their usual ofﬁce and go to some other location, 
whether down the hall or in another building.  In most cases users 
stand  rather  than  sit,  so  working  for  extended  periods  of  time  is 
physically taxing compared with sitting at a desk.  The most critical 
problem is that they do not have access to their standard working 
environment of their own computer system.  Without access to the 
usual input devices of mouse and keyboard, standard applications 
such as web browsing, email reading, text and spreadsheet editing, 
and other data analysis packages are completely unusable in most 
cases,  and  very  awkward  at  best.  In  contrast,  a  vis  system  that 
ﬁts  into  a  standard  desktop  environment  allows  integration  with 
the usual workﬂow and fast task switching between vis and other 
applications. 

A compelling example of immersion is the use of virtual reality 
for phobia desensitization;  somebody with a fear of heights would 
need a sense of presence in the synthetic environment in order to 
make progress.  However, this example is not an application of vis, 
since the goal is to simulate reality rather than to visually encode 
information.  The most likely case where immersion would be help-
ful for vis is when the chosen abstraction includes 3D spatial data. 
Even in this case, the designer should consider whether a sense of 
presence is worth the penalties of lower resolution and no workﬂow 
integration.  It is very rare that immersion would be necessary for 
nonspatial, abstract data.  Using 3D for visual encoding of abstract 
data  is  the  uncommon  case  that  needs  careful  justiﬁcation.  The 
use of an immersive display in this case would require even more 
careful justiﬁcation. 

6.7  Overview  First,  Zoom  and  Filter,  Details 

on Demand 

Ben Shneiderman’s inﬂuential mantra of Overview First, Zoom and 
Filter,  Details on Demand  [Shneiderman  96]  is  a  heavily  cited  de-
sign guideline that emphasizes the interplay between the need for 
overview and the need to see details, and the role of data reduction 
in general and navigation in particular in supporting both. 

A  vis  idiom  that  provides  an  overview  is  intended  to  give  the 
user a broad awareness of the entire information space.  Using the 
language  of  the  what–why–how  analysis  framework,  it’s  an  idiom

‣ The need for justifying 3D 
for abstract data is covered 
in Section 6.3. 

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

136

6. Rules of Thumb

with  the  goal  of  summarize.  A  common  goal  in  overview  design 
is  to  show  all  items  in  the  dataset  simultaneously,  without  any 
need for navigation to pan or scroll.  Overviews help the user ﬁnd 
regions where further investigation in more detail might be produc-
tive.  Overviews are often shown at the beginning of the exploration 
process, to guide users in choosing where to drill down to inspect 
in  more  detail.  However,  overview  usage  is  not  limited  to  initial 
reconnaissance;  it’s  very  common  for  users  to  interleave  the  use 
of overviews and detail views by switching back and forth between 
them many times. 

When the dataset is sufﬁciently large, some form of reduce  ac-
tion  must  be  used  in  order  to  show  everything  at  once.  Overview 
creation  can  be  understood  in  terms  of  both  ﬁltering  and  aggre-
gation.  A  simple  way  to  create  overviews  is  by  zooming  out  ge-
ometrically,  so  that  the  entire  dataset  is  visible  within  the  frame. 
Each object is drawn smaller, with less room to show detail.  In this 
sense, overviews are created by removing all ﬁltering:  an overview 
is  created  by  changing  from  a  zoomed-in  view  where  some  items 
are  ﬁltered  out,  to  a  zoomed-out  view  where  all  items  are  shown. 
When  the  number  of  items  in  a  dataset  is  large  enough,  showing 
an overview of the entire dataset in a single screen using one mark 
per item is impossible, even if the mark size is decreased to a sin-
gle pixel.  When the number of items to draw outstrips the number 
of available pixels, the number of marks to show must be reduced 
with aggregation.  Moreover, even for datasets of medium size, ex-
plicitly  designing  an  overview  display  using  a  more  sophisticated 
approach  than  simple  geometric  zooming  can  be  fruitful.  These 
custom overviews are similar in spirit to semantic zooming, in that 
the representation of the items is qualitatively different rather than 
simply  being  drawn  smaller  than  the  full-detail  versions.  These 
kinds of overviews often use dynamic aggregation that is implicitly 
driven  by  navigation,  rather  than  being  explicitly  chosen  by  the 
user. 

There is no crisp line dividing an “overview” from an “ordinary” 
vis idiom, because many idioms provide some form of overview or 
summary.  However, it’s often useful to make a relative distinction 
between  a  less  detailed  view  that  summarizes  a  lot  of  data  and  a 
more detailed view that shows a smaller number of data items with 
more  information  about  each  one.  The  former  one  is  clearly  the 
overview, the latter one is the detail view.  It’s particularly obvious 
how to distinguish between these when the idiom design choice of 
multiple views is being used; the mantra is particularly applicable 
when the detail view pops up in response to a select  action by the

‣ Aggregation is discussed 
in Section 13.4. 

‣  Geometric  and  semantic 
zooming  are  discussed  in 
Section 11.5. 

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

6.8. Responsiveness Is Required

137

‣ Chapter 12 covers multi-
ple views. 

‣  Chapter  13  covers  ap-
proaches to data reduction. 

‣  Chapter  14  covers  fo-
cus+context idioms.

user,  but  it’s  also  common  for  the  detail  view  to  be  permanently 
visible side by side with the overview.  There two other major fam-
ilies  of  idioms  that  support  overviewing.  One  is  to  use  a  single 
view that dynamically changes over time by providing support for 
reduce actions such as zooming and ﬁltering; then that single view 
sometimes acts as an overview and sometimes as a detail view. The 
third choice is to embed both detailed focus and overview context 
information together within a single view. 

This mantra is most helpful when dealing with datasets of mod-
erate size.  When dealing with enormous datasets, creating a useful 
overview  for  top-down  exploration  may  not  be  feasible.  In  slogan 
form, an alternative approach is Search, Show Context, Expand on 
Demand [van Ham and Perer 09], where search results provide the 
starting point for browsing of local neighborhoods. 

6.8  Responsiveness Is Required 

The latency of interaction, namely, how much time it takes for the 
system to respond to the user action, matters immensely for inter-
action design.  Our reaction to latency does not simply occur on a 
continuum, where our irritation level gradually rises as things take 
longer and longer.  Human reaction to phenomena is best modeled 
in  terms  of  a  series  of  discrete  categories,  with  a  different  time 
constant associated with each one.  A system will feel responsive if 
these latency classes are taken into account by providing feedback 
to  the  user  within  the  relevant  time  scale.  The  three  categories 
most relevant for vis designers are shown in Table 6.1. 

The perceptual processing time constant of one-tenth of a sec-
ond is relevant for operations such as screen updates. The immedi-
ate response time constant of one second is relevant for operations 
such as visual feedback showing what item that user has selected 
with  a  mouse  click,  or  the  length  of  time  for  an  animated  transi-
tion from one layout to another.  The brief task time constant of ten 

Time Constant
perceptual processing
immediate response
brief tasks

Value (in seconds) 
0.1 
1 
10 

Table 6.1.  Human response to interaction latency changes dramatically at these 
time thresholds. After [Card et al. 91, Table 3].

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

138

6. Rules of Thumb

seconds is relevant for breaking down complex tasks into simpler 
pieces; a good granularity for the smallest pieces is this brief task 
time. 

6.8.1  Visual Feedback 

From  the  user’s  point  of  view,  the  latency  of  an  interaction  is 
the  time  between  their  action  and  some  feedback  from  the  sys-
tem indicating that the operation has completed.  In a vis system, 
that  feedback  would  most  naturally  be  some  visual  indication  of 
state change within the system itself, rather than cumbersome ap-
proaches such as printing out status indications at the console or 
a popup dialog box conﬁrmation that would interfere with the ﬂow 
of exploration. 

The most obvious principle is that the user should indeed have 
some  sort  of  conﬁrmation  that  the  action  has  completed,  rather 
than  being  left  dangling  wondering  whether  the  action  is  still  in 
progress, or whether the action never started in the ﬁrst place (for 
example, because they missed the target and clicked on the back-
ground  rather  than  the  intended  object).  Thus,  feedback  such  as 
highlighting  a  selected  item  is  a  good  way  to  conﬁrm  that  the  de-
sired  operation  has  completed  successfully.  In  navigation,  feed-
back  would  naturally  come  when  the  user  sees  the  new  frame 
is  drawn  from  the  changed  viewpoint.  Visual  feedback  should 
typically  take  place  within  the  immediate  response  latency  class: 
around one second. 

Another  principle  is  that  if  an  action  could  take  signiﬁcantly 
longer than a user would naturally expect,  some kind of progress 
indicator  should  be  shown  to  the  user.  A  good  rule  of  thumb  for 
signiﬁcantly longer is crossing from one latency class into another, 
as shown in Table 6.1. 

6.8.2 

Latency and Interaction Design 

Successful  interaction  design  for  a  vis  system  depends  on  hav-
ing a good match between the latencies of the low-level interaction 
mechanism,  the  visual  feedback  mechanism,  the  system  update 
time, and the cognitive load of operation itself. 

For  example,  consider  the  operation  of  seeing  more  details  for 
an item and the latency difference between three different low-level 
interaction mechanisms for doing so.  Clicking on the item is slow-
est,  because the user must move the mouse toward the target lo-
cation,  stop the motion in the right place,  and press down on the

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

6.8. Responsiveness Is Required

139

mouse.  Mouseover hover, where the cursor is placed over the ob-
ject  for  some  short  period  of  dwell  time  but  no  click  is  required, 
may or may not be faster depending on the dwell time.  Mouseover 
actions  with  no  dwell  time  requirement,  where  the  action  is  trig-
gered  by  the  cursor  simply  crossing  the  object,  are  of  course  the 
fastest because the second step is also eliminated and only the ﬁrst 
step needs to take place. 

For  visual  feedback,  consider  three  different  mechanisms  for 
showing  the  information.  One  is  showing  the  information  on  a 
ﬁxed  detail  pane  at  the  side  of  the  screen.  In  order  to  see  the  in-
formation,  the  user’s  eyes  need  to  move  from  the  current  cursor 
location  to  the  side  of  the  screen,  so  this  operation  has  relatively 
high  latency  for  making  use  of  the  visual  feedback.  On  the  other 
hand,  from  a  visual  encoding  point  of  view,  an  advantage  is  that 
a  lot  of  detail  information  can  be  shown  without  occluding  any-
thing  else  in  the  main  display.  A  second  feedback  mechanism  is 
a popup window at the current cursor location,  which is faster to 
use  since  there  is  no  need  to  move  the  eyes  away  from  tracking 
the cursor.  Since placing information directly in the view might oc-
clude other objects, there is a visual encoding cost to this choice.  A 
third mechanism is a visual highlight change directly in the view, 
for instance by highlighting all neighbors within the graph that are 
one  hop  from  the  graph  node  under  the  cursor  through  a  color 
change. 

System  update  time  is  another  latency  to  consider.  With  tiny 
datasets  stored  completely  locally,  update  time  will  be  negligible 
for any of these  options.  With  larger datasets,  the time  to redraw 
the entire view could be considerable unless the rendering*  frame-
work  has  been  designed  to  deliver  frames  at  a  guaranteed  rate. 
Similarly, scalable rendering frameworks can support fast update 
for changing a few items or a small part of the display without re-
drawing the entire screen, but most graphics systems do not offer 
this  functionality  by  default.  Thus,  designing  systems  to  guar-
antee  immediate  response  to  user  actions  can  require  signiﬁcant 
algorithmic attention.  With distributed datasets, obtaining details 
may  require  a  round  trip  from  the  client  to  the  server,  possibly 
taking several seconds on a congested network. 

When  systems  are  designed  so  that  all  of  these  latencies  are 
well  matched,  the  user  interacts  ﬂuidly  and  can  stay  focused  on 
high-level  goals  such  as  building  an  internal  mental  model  of  the 
dataset.  When  there  is  a  mismatch,  the  user  is  jarred  out  of  a 
state  of  ﬂow  [Csikszentmihalyi  91]  by  being  forced  to  wait  for  the 
system.

*  The  term  rendering  is 
used  in  computer  graphics 
for drawing an image. 

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

ο

140

6. Rules of Thumb

6.8.3 

Interactivity Costs 

Interactivity  has  both  power  and  cost.  The  beneﬁt  of  interaction 
is that people can explore a larger information space than can be 
understood in a single static image.  However, a cost to interaction 
is  that  it  requires  human  time  and  attention.  If  the  user  must 
exhaustively  check  every  possibility,  use  of  the  vis  system  may 
degenerate  into  human-powered  search.  Automatically  detecting 
features of interest to explicitly bring to the user’s attention via the 
visual encoding is a useful goal for the vis designer.  However, if the 
task at hand could be completely solved by automatic means, there 
would be no need for a vis in the ﬁrst place.  Thus, there is always 
a trade-off between ﬁnding automatable aspects and relying on the 
human in the loop to detect patterns. 

6.9  Get It Right in Black and White 

‣  The  principles  of  us-
ing color to visually encode 
data  are  discussed  in  Sec-
Figure  12.13 
tion  10.2. 
shows  an  example  of  ex-
plicitly  checking  luminance 
contrast  between  elements 
on different layers. 

Maureen Stone has advocated the slogan Get It Right in Black and 
White  as  a  design  guideline  for  effective  use  of  color  [Stone  10]. 
That  is,  ensure  that  the  most  crucial  aspects  of  visual  represen-
tation  are  legible  even  if  the  image  is  transformed  from  full  color 
to black and white.  Do so by literally checking your work in black 
and white, either with image processing or by simply printing out a 
screenshot on a black and white printer.  This slogan suggests en-
coding the most important attribute with the luminance channel to 
ensure adequate luminance contrast and considering the hue and 
saturation channels as secondary sources of information. 

6.10 

Function First, Form Next 

The best vis designs should shine in terms of both form and func-
tion; that is, they should be both beautiful and effective.  Neverthe-
less, in this book, I focus on function. 

My rationale is that given an effective but ugly design, it’s possi-
ble to reﬁne the form to make it more beautiful while maintaining 
the base of effectiveness. Even if the original designer of the vis has 
no training in graphic design, collaboration is possible with people 
who do have that background. 

In  contrast,  given  a  beautiful  and  ineffective  design,  you  will 
probably need to toss it out and start from scratch.  Thus,  I don’t 
advocate  a  “form  ﬁrst”  approach,  because  progressive  reﬁnement

ο

ο

ο

ο

