--- PAGE 51 ---
ο ο
ο ο
26 2. What: DataAbstraction
atFtierlidbute
item cell
20
Figure 2.5. In a simple table of orders, a row represents an item, a column rep-
resents an attribute, and their intersection is the cell containing the value for that
* A synonym for networks pairwise combination.
is graphs. The word graph
is also deeply overloaded in
vis. Sometimes it is used
2.4.2 Networks and Trees
to mean network as we dis-
cuss here, for instance in
The dataset type of networks is well suited for specifying that there
the vis subfield called graph is some kind of relationship between two or more items.* An item in
drawing or the mathemat- a network is often called a node.* A link is a relation between two
ical subfield called graph items.* For example, in an articulated social network the nodes
theory. Sometimes it is
are people, and links mean friendship. In a gene interaction net-
used in the field of statisti-
work, the nodes are genes, and links between them mean that
cal graphics to mean chart,
these genes have been observed to interact with each other. In a
as in bar graphs and line
computer network, the nodes are computers, and the links repre-
graphs.
sent the ability to send messages directly between two computers
* A synonym for node is using physical cables or a wireless connection.
vertex. Network nodes can have associated attributes, just like items in
a table. In addition, the links themselves could also be considered
* A synonym for link is to have attributes associated with them; these may be partly or
edge. wholly disjoint from the node attributes.
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 52 ---
О О
О О
2.4. DatasetTypes 27
It is again important to distinguish between the abstract con- ‣ The spatial arrangement
cept of a network and any particular visual layout of that network
of networks is covered in
where the nodes and edges have particular spatial positions. This
Chapter 9.
chapter concentrates on the former.
2.4.2.1 Trees
Networks with hierarchical structure are more specifically called
trees. In contrast to a general network, trees do not have cycles:
each child node has only one parent node pointing to it. One exam-
ple of a tree is the organization chart of a company, showing who
reports to whom; another example is a tree showing the evolu-
tionary relationships between species in the biological tree of life,
where the child nodes of humans and monkeys both share the
same parent node of primates.
2.4.3 Fields
The field dataset type also contains attribute values associated
with cells.1 Each cell in a field contains measurements or calcula-
tions from a continuous domain: there are conceptually infinitely
many values that you might measure, so you could always take
a new measurement between any two existing ones. Continuous
phenomena that might be measured in the physical world or simu-
lated in software include temperature, pressure, speed, force, and
density; mathematical functions can also be continuous.
For example, consider a field dataset representing a medical
scan of a human body containing measurements indicating the
density of tissue at many sample points, spread regularly through-
out a volume of 3D space. A low-resolution scan would have
262,144 cells, providing information about a cubical volume of
space with 64 bins in each direction. Each cell is associated with
a specific region in 3D space. The density measurements could
be taken closer together with a higher resolution grid of cells, or
further apart for a coarser grid.
Continuous data requires careful treatment that takes into ac-
count the mathematical questions of sampling, how frequently to
1 My use of the term field is related to but not identical to its use in the math-
ematics literature, where it denotes a mapping from a domain to a range. In this
case, the domain is a Euclidean space of one, two, or three dimensions, and the ad-
jective modifying field is a statement about the range: scalars, vectors, or tensors.
Although the term field by itself is not commonly found in the literature, when I
use it without an adjective I’m emphasizing the continuous nature of the domain,
rather than specifics of the ranges of scalars, vectors, or tensors.
О О
О О

--- PAGE 53 ---
ο ο
ο ο
28 2. What: DataAbstraction
take the measurements, and interpolation, how to show values in
between the sampled points in a way that does not mislead. In-
terpolating appropriately between the measurements allows you
to reconstruct a new view of the data from an arbitrary viewpoint
that’s faithful to what you measured. These general mathematical
problems are studied in areas such as signal processing and statis-
tics. Visualizing fields requires grappling extensively with these
concerns.
In contrast, the table and network datatypes discussed above
are an example of discrete data where a finite number of individ-
ual items exist, and interpolation between them is not a mean-
ingful concept. In the cases where a mathematical framework is
necessary, areas such as graph theory and combinatorics provide
relevant ideas.2
2.4.3.1 Spatial Fields
Continuous data is often found in the form of a spatial field, where
the cell structure of the field is based on sampling at spatial po-
sitions. Most datasets that contain inherently spatial data occur
in the context of tasks that require understanding aspects of its
spatial structure, especially shape.
For example, with a spatial field dataset that is generated with a
medical imaging instrument, the user’s task could be to locate sus-
pected tumors that can be recognized through distinctive shapes or
densities. An obvious choice for visual encoding would be to show
something that spatially looks like an X-ray image of the human
body and to use color coding to highlight suspected tumors. An-
other example is measurements made in a real or simulated wind
tunnel of the temperature and pressure of air flowing over airplane
wings at many points in 3D space, where the task is to compare
the flow patterns in different regions. One possible visual encod-
ing would use the geometry of the wing as the spatial substrate,
showing the temperature and pressure using size-coded arrows.
The likely tasks faced by users who have spatial field data con-
strains many of the choices about the use of space when designing
visual encoding idioms. Many of the choices for nonspatial data,
* A synonym for nonspatial where no information about spatial position is provided with the
data is abstract data. dataset, are unsuitable in this case.*
2 Technically, all data stored within a computer is discrete rather than continu-
ous; however, the interesting question is whether the underlying semantics of the
bits that are stored represents samples of a continuous phenomenon or intrinsically
discrete data.
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 54 ---
ο ο
ο ο
2.4. DatasetTypes 29
Thus, the question of whether a dataset has the type of a spa-
tial field or a nonspatial table has extensive and far-reaching im-
plications for idiom design. Historically, vis diverged into areas of
specialization based on this very differentiation. The subfield of
scientific visualization, or scivis for short, is concerned with situ-
ations where spatial position is given with the dataset. A central
concern in scivis is handling continuous data appropriately within
the mathematical framework of signal processing. The subfield of
information visualization, or infovis for short, is concerned with sit-
uations where the use of space in a visual encoding is chosen by
the designer. A central concern in infovis is determining whether
the chosen idiom is suitable for the combination of data and task,
leading to the use of methods from human–computer interaction
and design.
2.4.3.2 Grid Types
When a field contains data created by sampling at completely reg-
ular intervals, as in the previous example, the cells form a uniform
grid. There is no need to explicitly store the grid geometry in terms
of its location in space, or the grid topology in terms of how each
cell connects with its neighboring cells. More complicated exam-
ples require storing different amounts of geometric and topological
information about the underlying grid. A rectilinear grid supports
nonuniform sampling, allowing efficient storage of information that
has high complexity in some areas and low complexity in others, at
the cost of storing some information about the geometric location of
each each row. A structured grid allows curvilinear shapes, where
the geometric location of each cell needs to be specified. Finally,
unstructured grids provide complete flexibility, but the topological
information about how the cells connect to each other must be
stored explicitly in addition to their spatial positions.
2.4.4 Geometry
The geometry dataset type specifies information about the shape
of items with explicit spatial positions. The items could be points,
or one-dimensional lines or curves, or 2D surfaces or regions, or
3D volumes.
Geometry datasets are intrinsically spatial, and like spatial fields
they typically occur in the context of tasks that require shape un-
derstanding. Spatial data often includes hierarchical structure at
multiple scales. Sometimes this structure is provided intrinsically
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 55 ---
ο ο
ο ο
30 2. What: DataAbstraction
with the dataset, or a hierarchy may be derived from the original
data.
Geometry datasets do not necessarily have attributes, in con-
trast to the other three basic dataset types. Many of the design
issues in vis pertain to questions about how to encode attributes.
Purely geometric data is interesting in a vis context only when it
‣ Section 3.4.2.3 covers is derived or transformed in a way that requires consideration of
deriving data. design choices. One classic example is when contours are derived
from a spatial field. Another is when shapes are generated at an
‣ Section 8.4 covers gen- appropriate level of detail for the task at hand from raw geographic
erating contours from scalar data, such as the boundaries of a forest or a city or a country, or
fields. the curve of a road. The problem of how to create images from a ge-
ometric description of a scene falls into another domain: computer
graphics. While vis draws on algorithms from computer graphics,
it has different concerns from that domain. Simply showing a geo-
metric dataset is not an interesting problem from the point of view
of a vis designer.
Geometric data is sometimes shown alone, particularly when
shape understanding is the primary task. In other cases, it is the
backdrop against which additional information is overlaid.
2.4.5 Other Combinations
Beyond tables, there are many ways to group multiple items to-
gether, including sets, lists, and clusters. A set is simply an un-
ordered group of items. A group of items with a specified ordering
* In computer science, ar- could be called a list.* A cluster is a grouping based on attribute
ray is often used as a syn- similarity, where items within a cluster are more similar to each
onym for list. other than to ones in another cluster.
There are also more complex structures built on top of the basic
network type. A path through a network is an ordered set of seg-
ments formed by links connecting nodes. A compound network is
a network with an associated tree: all of the nodes in the network
are the leaves of the tree, and interior nodes in the tree provide a
hierarchical structure for the nodes that is different from network
links between them.
Many other kinds of data either fit into one of the previous cat-
egories or do so after transformations to create derived attributes.
Complex and hybrid combinations, where the complete dataset
contains multiple basic types, are common in real-world applica-
tions.
The set of basic types presented above is a starting point for
describing the what part of an analysis instance that pertains to
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 56 ---
ο ο
ο ο
2.5. AttributeTypes 31
Dataset Availability
Static Dynamic
Figure 2.6. Dataset availability can be either static or dynamic, for any dataset
type.
data; that is, the data abstraction. In simple cases, it may be possi-
ble to describe your data abstraction using only that set of terms.
In complex cases, you may need additional description as well.
If so, your goal should be to translate domain-specific terms into
words that are as generic as possible.
2.4.6 Dataset Availability
Figure 2.6 shows the two kinds of dataset availability: static or
dynamic.
The default approach to vis assumes that the entire dataset is
available all at once, as a static file. However, some datasets are
instead dynamic streams, where the dataset information trickles in
over the course of the vis session.* One kind of dynamic change is * A synonym for dynamic
to add new items or delete previous items. Another is to change is online, and a synonym
the values of existing items. for static is offline.
This distinction in availability crosscuts the basic dataset types:
any of them can be static or dynamic. Designing for streaming
data adds complexity to many aspects of the vis process that are
straightforward when there is complete dataset availability up front.
2.5 Attribute Types
Figure 2.7 shows the attribute types. The major disinction is be-
tween categorical versus ordered. Within the ordered type is a
further differentiation between ordinal versus quantitative. Or-
dered data might range sequentially from a minimum to a maxi-
mum value, or it might diverge in both directions from a zero point
in the middle of a range, or the values may wrap around in a cycle.
Also, attributes may have hierarchical structure.
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 57 ---
ο ο
ο ο
32 2. What: DataAbstraction
Attributes
Attribute Types
Categorical Ordered
Ordinal Quantitative
Ordering Direc tion
Sequential Diverging Cyclic
Figure 2.7. Attribute types are categorical, ordinal, or quantitative. The direction
of attribute ordering can be sequential, diverging, or cyclic.
2.5.1 Categorical
The first distinction is between categorical and ordered data. The
type of categorical data, such as favorite fruit or names, does not
* A synonym for categori- have an implicit ordering, but it often has hierarchical structure.*
cal is nominal. Categories can only distinguish whether two things are the same
(apples) or different (apples versus oranges). Of course, any ar-
bitrary external ordering can be imposed upon categorical data.
Fruit could be ordered alphabetically according to its name, or
by its price—but only if that auxiliary information were available.
However, these orderings are not implicit in the attribute itself, the
way they are with quantitative or ordered data. Other examples of
categorical attributes are movie genres, file types, and city names.
2.5.2 Ordered: Ordinal and Quantitative
All ordered data does have an implicit ordering, as opposed to un-
ordered categorical data. This type can be further subdivided. With
ordinal data, such as shirt size, we cannot do full-fledged arith-
metic, but there is a well-defined ordering. For example, large
minus medium is not a meaningful concept, but we know that
medium falls between small and large. Rankings are another kind
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 58 ---
ο ο
ο ο
2.5. AttributeTypes 33
of ordinal data; some examples of ordered data are top-ten lists of
movies or initial lineups for sports tournaments depending on past
performance.
A subset of ordered data is quantitative data, namely, a mea-
surement of magnitude that supports arithmetic comparison. For
example, the quantity of 68 inches minus 42 inches is a mean-
ingful concept, and the answer of 26 inches can be calculated.
Other examples of quantitative data are height, weight, tempera-
ture, stock price, number of calling functions in a program, and
number of drinks sold at a coffee shop in a day. Both integers and
real numbers are quantitative data.3
In this book, the ordered type is used often; the ordinal type is
only occasionally mentioned, when the distinction between it and
the quantitative type matters.
2.5.2.1 Sequential versus Diverging
Ordered data can be either sequential, where there is a homoge-
neous range from a minimum to a maximum value, or diverging,
which can be deconstructed into two sequences pointing in oppo-
site directions that meet at a common zero point. For instance,
a mountain height dataset is sequential, when measured from a
minimum point of sea level to a maximum point of Mount Everest.
A bathymetric dataset is also sequential, with sea level on one end
and the lowest point on the ocean floor at the other. A full elevation
dataset would be diverging, where the values go up for mountains
on land and down for undersea valleys, with the zero value of sea
level being the common point joining the two sequential datasets.
2.5.2.2 Cyclic
Ordered data may be cyclic, where the values wrap around back
to a starting point rather than continuing to increase indefinitely.
Many kinds of time measurements are cyclic, including the hour
of the day, the day of the week, and the month of the year.
2.5.3 Hierarchical Attributes
There may be hierarchical structure within an attribute or between
multiple attributes. The daily stock prices of companies collected
3 In some domains the quantitative category is further split into interval versus
ratio data [Stevens 46]; this distinction is typically not useful when designing a
visual encoding, so in this book these types remain collapsed together into this
single category.
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 59 ---
ο ο
ο ο
34 2. What: DataAbstraction
over the course of a decade is an example of a time-series data-
set, where one of the attributes is time. In this case, time can be
aggregated hierarchically, from individual days up to weeks, up to
months, up to years. There may be interesting patterns at mul-
tiple temporal scales, such as very strong weekly variations for
‣ Section 13.4 covers hi- weekday versus weekend, or more subtle yearly patterns show-
erarchical aggregation in ing seasonal variations in summer versus winter. Many kinds of
more detail, and Section 7.5 attributes might have this sort of hierarchical structure: for exam-
covers the visual encoding ple, the geographic attribute of a postal code can be aggregated up
of attribute hierarchies. to the level of cities or states or entire countries.
2.6 Semantics
Knowing the type of an attribute does not tell us about its seman-
tics, because these two questions are crosscutting: one does not
dictate the other. Different approaches to considering the seman-
tics of attributes that have been proposed across the many fields
where these semantics are studied. The classification in this book
is heavily focused on the semantics of keys versus values, and the
related questions of spatial and continuous data versus nonspa-
tial and discrete data, to match up with the idiom design choice
analysis framework. One additional consideration is whether an
attribute is temporal.
2.6.1 Key versus Value Semantics
A key attribute acts as an index that is used to look up value at-
* A synonym for key at-
tributes.* The distinction between key and value attributes is im-
tribute is independent at-
portant for the dataset types of tables and fields, as shown in Fig-
tribute. A synonym for
ure 2.8.
value attribute is depen-
dent attribute. The lan-
guage of independent and 2.6.1.1 Flat Tables
dependent is common in
A simple flat table has only one key, where each item corresponds
statistics. In the language
to a row in the table, and any number of value attributes. In this
of data warehouses, a syn-
case, the key might be completely implicit, where it’s simply the in-
onym for independent is di-
dex of the row. It might be explicit, where it is contained within the
mension, and a synonym
table as an attribute. In this case, there must not be any duplicate
for dependent is measure.
values within that attribute. In tables, keys may be categorical or
ordinal attributes, but quantititive attributes are typically unsuit-
able as keys because there is nothing to prevent them from having
the same values for multiple items.
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 60 ---
2.6. Semantics 35
Tables Fields (Continuous)
Attributes (columns) Grid of positions
I tems
Cell
(rows)
Cell containing value Attributes (columns)
Value in cell
Multidimensional Table
Value in cell
Figure 2.8. Key and value semantics for tables and fields.
For example, in Table 2.1, Name is a categorical attribute that
might appear to be a reasonable key at first, but the last line shows
that two people have the same name, so it is not a good choice. Fa-
vorite Fruit is clearly not a key, despite being categorical, because
Pear appears in two different rows. The quantitative attribute of
Age has many duplicate values, as does the ordinal attribute of
Shirt Size. The first attribute in this flat table has an explicit unique
identifier that acts as the key.4 This key attribute could either be
ordinal, for example if the order that the rows were entered into
the table captures interesting temporal information, or categorical,
if it’s simply treated as a unique code.
Figure 2.9 shows the order table from Figure 2.5 where each
attribute is colored according to its type. There is no explicit key:
even the Order ID attribute has duplicates, because orders consist
of multiple items with different container sizes, so it does not act
as a unique identifier. This table is an example of using an implicit
key that is the row number within the table.
4 It’s common to store the key attribute in the first column, for understandability
by people and ease of building data structures by computers.

--- PAGE 61 ---
ο ο
ο ο
36 2. What: DataAbstraction
1q =u Qanuatnittiatattiivvee
22
2o =r dNionmailnal
3 = Ordinal
categorical
Figure 2.9. The order table with the attribute columns colored by their type; none
of them is a key.
2.6.1.2 Multidimensional Tables
The more complex case is a multidimensional table, where multi-
ple keys are required to look up an item. The combination of all
keys must be unique for each item, even though an individual key
attribute may contain duplicates. For example, a common multidi-
mensional table from the biology domain has a gene as one key and
time as another key, so that the value in each cell is the activity
level of a gene at a particular time.
The information about which attributes are keys and which are
values may not be available; in many instances determining which
attributes are independent keys versus dependent values is the
goal of the vis process, rather than its starting point. In this case,
the successful outcome of analysis using vis might be to recast a
flat table into a more semantically meaningful multidimensional
table.
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 62 ---
ο ο
ο ο
2.6. Semantics 37
2.6.1.3 Fields
Although fields differ from tables a fundamental way because they
represent continuous rather than discrete data, keys and values
are still central concerns. (Different vocabulary for the same basic
idea is more common with spatial field data, where the term in-
dependent variable is used instead of key, and dependent variable
instead of value.)
Fields are structured by sampling in a systematic way so that
each grid cell is spanned by a unique range from a continuous
domain. In spatial fields, spatial position acts as a quantitative
key, in contrast to a nonspatial attribute in the case of a table that
is categorical or ordinal. The crucial difference between fields and
tables is that useful answers for attribute values are returned for
locations throughout the sampled range, not just the exact points
where data was recorded.
Fields are typically characterized in terms of the number of keys
versus values. Their multivariate structure depends on the number
of value attributes, and their multidimensional structure depends
on the number of keys. The standard multidimensional cases are
2D and 3D fields for static measurements taken in two or three
spatial dimensions,5 and fields with three or four keys, in the case
where these measurements are time-varying. A field can be both
multidimensional and multivariate if it has multiple keys and mul-
tiple values. The standard classification according to multivariate
structure is that a scalar field has one attribute per cell, a vector * These definitions of
field has two or more attributes per cell, and a tensor field has scalar, vector, and ten-
many attributes per cell.* sor follow the common
usage in vis. In a strict
2.6.1.4 Scalar Fields mathematical sense, these
distinctions are not techni-
A scalar field is univariate, with a single value attribute at each
cally correct, since scalars
point in space. One example of a 3D scalar field is the time-varying
and vectors are included
medical scan above; another is the temperature in a room at each
as a degenerate case
point in 3D space. The geometric intuition is that each point in
of tensors. Mapping the
a scalar field has a single value. A point in space can have sev-
mathematical usage to the
eral different numbers associated with it; if there is no underlying
vis usage, scalars mean
connection between them then they are simply multiple separate
mathematical tensors of
scalar fields.
order 0, vectors mean
mathematical tensors of
2.6.1.5 Vector Fields
order 1, and tensors mean
A vector field is multivariate, with a list of multiple attribute values mathematical tensors of
at each point. The geometric intuition is that each point in a vector order 2 or more.
5 It’s also possible for a spatial field to have just one key.
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 63 ---
ο ο
ο ο
38 2. What: DataAbstraction
field has a direction and magnitude, like an arrow that can point in
any direction and that can be any length. The length might mean
the speed of a motion or the strength of a force. A concrete example
of a 3D vector field is the velocity of air in the room at a specific time
point, where there is a direction and speed for each item. The di-
mensionality of the field determines the number of components in
the direction vector; its length can be computed directly from these
components, using the standard Euclidean distance formula. The
standard cases are two, three, or four components, as above.
2.6.1.6 Tensor Fields
A tensor field has an array of attributes at each point, representing
a more complex multivariate mathematical structure than the list
of numbers in a vector. A physical example is stress, which in the
case of a 3D field can be defined by nine numbers that represent
forces acting in three orthogonal directions. The geometric intution
is that the full information at each point in a tensor field cannot be
represented by just an arrow and would require a more complex
shape such as an ellipsoid.
2.6.1.7 Field Semantics
This categorization of spatial fields requires knowledge of the at-
tribute semantics and cannot be determined from type informa-
tion alone. If you are given a field with multiple measured values
at each point and no further information, there is no sure way to
know its structure. For example, nine values could represent many
things: nine separate scalar fields, or a mix of multiple vector fields
and scalar fields, or a single tensor field.
2.6.2 Temporal Semantics
A temporal attribute is simply any kind of information that re-
lates to time. Data about time is complicated to handle because
of the rich hierarchical structure that we use to reason about time,
and the potential for periodic structure. The time hierarchy is
deeply multiscale: the scale of interest could range anywhere from
nanoseconds to hours to decades to millennia. Even the common
words time and date are a way to partially specify the scale of tem-
poral interest. Temporal analysis tasks often involve finding or ver-
ifying periodicity either at a predetermined scale or at some scale
not known in advance. Moreover, the temporal scales of interest
do not all fit into a strict hierarchy; for instance, weeks do not fit
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 64 ---
ο ο
ο ο
2.6. Semantics 39
cleanly into months. Thus, the generic vis problems of transforma- ‣ Section 3.4.2.3 intro-
tion and aggregation are often particularly complex when dealing duces the problem of
with temporal data. One important idea is that even though the data transformation. Sec-
dataset semantics involves change over time, there are many ap- tion 13.4 discusses the
proaches to visually encoding that data—and only one of them is question of aggregation in
to show it changing over time in the form of an animation. detail.
Temporal attributes can have either value or key semantics. Ex-
‣ Vision versus memory is
amples of temporal attributes with dependent value semantics are
discussed further in Sec-
a duration of elapsed time or the date on which a transaction oc-
tion 6.5.
curred. In both spatial fields and abstract tables, time can be an
independent key. For example, a time-varying medical scan can
have the independent keys of x, y, z , t to cover spatial position and
time, with the dependent value attribute of density for each com-
bination of four indices to look up position and time. A temporal
key attribute is usually considered to have a quantitative type, al-
though it’s possible to consider it as ordinal data if the duration
between events is not interesting.
2.6.2.1 Time-Varying Data
A dataset has time-varying semantics when time is one of the key
attributes, as opposed to when the temporal attribute is a value
rather than a key. As with other decisions about semantics, the
question of whether time has key or value semantics requires ex-
ternal knowledge about the nature of the dataset and cannot be
made purely from type information. An example of a dataset with
time-varying semantics is one created with a sensor network that
tracks the location of each animal within a herd by taking new
measurements every second. Each animal will have new location
data at every time point, so the temporal attribute is an indepen-
dent key and is likely to be a central aspect of understanding the
dataset. In contrast, a horse-racing dataset covering a year’s worth
of races could have temporal value attributes such as the race start
time and the duration of each horse’s run. These attributes do in-
deed deal with temporal information, but the dataset is not time-
varying.
A common case of temporal data occurs in a time-series dataset,
namely, an ordered sequence of time–value pairs. These datasets
are a special case of tables, where time is the key. These time-
value pairs are often but not always spaced at uniform temporal
intervals. Typical time-series analysis tasks involve finding trends,
correlations, and variations at multiple time scales such as hourly,
daily, weekly, and seasonal.
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 65 ---
ο ο
ο ο
40 2. What: DataAbstraction
The word dynamic is often used ambiguously to mean one of
two very different things. Some use it to mean a dataset has time-
‣ The dataset types of dy- varying semantics, in contrast to a dataset where time is not a key
namic streams versus static attribute, as discussed here. Others use it to mean a dataset has
files are discussed in Sec- stream type, in contrast to an unchanging file that can be loaded
tion 2.4.6. all at once. In this latter sense, items and attributes can be added
or deleted and their values may change during a running session
of a vis tool. I carefully distinguish between these two meanings
here.
2.7 Further Reading
The Big Picture The framework presented here was inspired in part
by the many taxonomies of data that have been previously
proposed, including the synthesis chapter at the beginning of
an early collection of infovis readings [Card et al. 99], a tax-
onomy that emphasizes the division between continuous and
discrete data [Tory and Mo¨ller 04a], and one that emphasizes
both data and tasks [Shneiderman 96].
Field Datasets Several books discuss the spatial field dataset type
in far more detail, including two textbooks [Telea 07, Ward
et al. 10], a voluminous handbook [Hansen and Johnson 05],
and the vtk book [Schroeder et al. 06].
Attribute Types The attribute types of categorical, ordered, and quan-
titative were proposed in the seminal work on scales of mea-
surement from the psychophysics literature [Stevens 46].
Scales of measurement are also discussed extensively in the
book The Grammar of Graphics [Wilkinson 05] and are used
as the foundational axes of an influential vis design space
taxonomy [Card and Mackinlay 97].
Key and Value Semantics The Polaris vis system, which has been com-
mercialized as Tableau, is built around the distinction be-
tween key attributes (independent dimensions) and value at-
tributes (dependent measures) [Stolte et al. 02].
Temporal Semantics A good resource for time-oriented data vis
is a recent book, Visualization of T ime-Oriented Data [Aigner
et al. 11].
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 66 ---
O O
O O
O O
O O

--- PAGE 67 ---
ο ο
ο ο
Why?
Ac tions Targets
Analyze All Data
Consume Trends Outliers Features
Discover Present Enjoy
Attributes
Produce
One Many
Annotate Record Derive
Distribution Dependency Correlation Similarity
tag
Extremes
Search
Target k nown Target unk nown
Location
Lookup Browse Network Data
k nown
Location Topology
Locate Explore
unk nown
Quer y
Paths
Identify Compare Summarize
What?
Spatial Data
Why?
Shape
How?
Figure 3.1. Why people are using vis in terms of actions and targets.
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 68 ---
ο ο
ο ο
Chapter 3
Why: Task Abstraction
3.1 The Big Picture
Figure 3.1 breaks down into actions and targets the reasons why
a vis tool is being used. The highest-level actions are to use vis
to consume or produce information. The cases for consuming are
to present, to discover, and to enjoy; discovery may involve gen-
erating or verifying a hypothesis. At the middle level, search can
be classified according to whether the identity and location of tar-
gets are known or not: both are known with lookup, the target is
known but its location is not for locate, the location is known but
the target is not for browse, and neither the target nor the location
are known for explore. At the low level, queries can have three
scopes: identify one target, compare some targets, and summarize
all targets. Targets for all kinds of data are finding trends and out-
liers. For one attribute, the target can be one value, the extremes
of minimum and maximum values, or the distribution of all values
across the entire attribute. For multiple attributes, the target can
be dependencies, correlations, or similarities between them. The
target with network data can be topology in general or paths in
particular, and with spatial data the target can be shape.
3.2 Why Analyze Tasks Abstractly?
This framework encourages you to consider tasks in abstract form,
rather than the domain-specific way that users typically think
about them.
Transforming task descriptions from domain-specific language
into abstract form allows you to reason about similarities and dif-
ferences between them. Otherwise, it’s hard to make useful com-
parisons between domain situations, because if you don’t do this
kind of translation then everything just appears to be different.
That apparent difference is misleading: there are a lot of similar-
43
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 69 ---
ο ο
ο ο
44 3. Why: TaskAbstraction
ities in what people want to do once you strip away the surface
language differences.
For example, an epidimiologist studying the spread of a new
strain of influenza might initially describe her task as “contrast
the prognosis of patients who were intubated in the ICU more
than one month after exposure to patients hospitalized within the
first week”, while a biologist studying immune system response
might use language such as “see if the results for the tissue sam-
ples treated with LL-37 match up with the ones without the pep-
tide”. Even if you know what all the specialized vocabulary means,
it’s still hard to think about what these two descriptions have in
common because they’re using different words: “contrast” versus
“match up”. If you transform these into descriptions using a con-
sistent set of generic terms, then you can spot that these two tasks
are just two instances of the same thing: “compare values between
two groups”.
The analysis framework has a small set of carefully chosen
words to describe why people are using vis, designed to help you
crisply and concisely distinguish between different goals. This set
has verbs describing actions, and nouns describing targets. It’s
possible that you might decide to use additional terms to com-
pletely and precisely describe the user’s goals; if so, strive to trans-
late domain-specific terms into words that are as generic as possi-
ble.
The same vis tool might be usable for many different goals. It is
often useful to consider only one of the user’s goals at a time, in or-
der to more easily consider the question of how a particular idiom
supports that goal. To describe complex activities, you can specify
a chained sequence of tasks, where the output of one becomes the
input to the next.
Another important reason to analyze the task is to understand
whether and how to transform the user’s original data into different
forms by deriving new data. That is, the task abstraction can and
should guide the data abstraction.
3.3 Who: Designer or User
It’s sometimes useful to augment an analysis instance specifica-
tion by indicating who has a goal or makes a design choice: the
designer of the vis or the end user of the vis. Both cases are com-
mon.
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 70 ---
ο ο
ο ο
3.4. Actions 45
Vis tools fall somewhere along a continuum from specific to gen-
eral. On the specific side, tools are narrow: the designer has built
many choices into the design of the tool itself in a way that the user
cannot override. These tools are limited in the kinds of data and
tasks that they can address, but their strength is that users are not
faced with an overwhelming array of design choices. On the gen-
eral side, tools are flexible and users have many choices to make.
The breadth of choices is both a strength and a limitation: users
have a lot of power, but they also may make ineffective choices if
they do not have a deep understanding of many vis design issues.
Specialized vis tools are designed for specific contexts with a
narrow range of data configurations, especially those created
through a problem-driven process. These specialized datasets are
often an interesting mix of complex combinations of and special
cases of the basic data types. They also are a mix of original and
derived data. In contrast, general vis tools are designed to handle a
wide range of data in a flexible way, for example, by accepting any ‣ Dataset types are cov-
dataset of a particular type as input: tables, or fields, or networks. ered in Section 2.4.
Some particularly broad tools handle multiple dataset types, for in-
stance, supporting transformations between tables and networks.
3.4 Actions
Figure 3.2 shows three levels of actions that define user goals. The
high-level choices describe how the vis is being used to analyze,
either to consume existing data or to also produce additional data.
The mid-level choices cover what kind of search is involved, in
terms of whether the target and location are known or not. The
low-level choices pertain to the kind of query: does the user need
to identify one target, compare some targets, or summarize all of
the targets? The choices at each of these three levels are indepen-
dent from each other, and it’s usually useful to describe actions at
all three of them.
3.4.1 Analyze
At the highest level, the framework distinguishes between two pos-
sible goals of people who want to analyze data using a vis tool:
users might want only to consume existing information or also to
actively produce new information.
The most common use case for vis is for the user to consume
information that has already been generated as data stored in a
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 71 ---
ο ο
ο ο
46 3. Why: TaskAbstraction
Actions
Analyze
Consume
Discover Present Enjoy
Produce
Annotate Record Derive
tag
Search
Target k nown Target unk nown
Location
Lookup Browse
k nown
Location
Locate Explore
unk nown
Query
Identify Compare Summarize
Figure 3.2. Three levels of actions: analyze, search, and query.
format amenable to computation. The framework has three fur-
ther distinctions within that case: whether the goal is to present
something that the user already understands to a third party, or
for the user to discover something new or analyze information that
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 72 ---
ο ο
ο ο
3.4. Actions 47
is not already completely understood, or for users to enjoy a vis to
indulge their casual interests in a topic.
3.4.1.1 Discover
The discover goal refers to using vis to find new knowledge that was
not previously known. Discovery may arise from the serendipitous
observation of unexpected phenomena, but investigation may be
motivated by existing theories, models, hypotheses, or hunches.
This usage includes the goal of finding completely new things; that
is, the outcome is to generate a new hypothesis. It also includes
the goal of figuring out whether a conjecture is true or false; that
is, to verify—or disconfirm—an existing hypothesis.
While vis for discovery is often associated with modes of sci-
entific inquiry, it is not restricted to domain situations that are * This distinction between
formally considered branches of science. The discover goal is often the goals of presentation of
discussed as the classic motivation for sophisticated interactive id- the known and discovery of
ioms, because the vis designer doesn’t know in advance what the the unknown is very com-
user will need to see.* The fundamental motivation of this analysis mon in the vis literature, but
framework is to help you separate out the questions of why the vis other sources may use dif-
is being used from how the vis idiom is designed to achieve those ferent terms, such as ex-
goals, so I will repeatedly emphasize that why doesn’t dictate how. plain versus explore.
3.4.1.2 Present
The present goal refers to the use of vis for the succinct commu-
nication of information, for telling a story with data, or guiding
an audience through a series of cognitive operations. Presenta-
tion using vis may take place within the context of decision mak-
ing, planning, forecasting, and instructional processes. The crucial
point about the present goal is that vis is being used by somebody
to communicate something specific and already understood to an
audience.
Presentation may involve collaborative or pedagogical contexts,
and the means by which a presentation is given may vary accord-
ing to the size of the audience, whether the presentation is live or
prerecorded, and whether the audience is in the same place as the
presenter. One classic example of a present vis is static informa-
tion graphics, such as a diagram in a newspaper or an image in
a blog. However, the present goal is not intrinsically limited to a
static visual encoding idiom; it’s very possible to pursue this goal
with dynamic vis idioms that include interaction and animation.
Once again, the decision about why is separable from how the id-
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 73 ---
ο ο
ο ο
48 3. Why: TaskAbstraction
iom is designed: presentation can be supported through a wide
variety of idiom design choices.
A crucial aspect of presentation is that the knowledge commu-
nicated is already known to the presenter in advance. Sometimes
the presenter knows it before using vis at all and uses the vis only
for communication. In other cases, the knowledge arose from the
presenter’s previous use of vis with the goal of discovery, and it’s
useful to think about a chained sequence of tasks where the output
of a discover session becomes the input to a present session.
3.4.1.3 Enjoy
The enjoy goal refers to casual encounters with vis. In these con-
texts, the user is not driven by a previously pressing need to verify
or generate a hypothesis but by curiosity that might be both stim-
ulated and satisfied by the vis. Casual encounters with vis for
enjoyment can be fleeting, such as when looking at an infographic
while reading a blog post. However, users can become sufficiently
engaged with an enjoyable vis tool that they use it intensively for a
more extended period of time.
One aspect of this classification that’s tricky is that the goals
of the eventual vis user might not be a match with the user goals
conjectured by the vis designer. For example, a vis tool may have
been intended by the designer for the goal of discovery with a par-
ticular audience, but it might be used for pure enjoyment by a
different group of people. In the analyses presented in this book
I’ll assume that these goals are aligned, but in your own experience
as a designer you might need to consider how they might diverge.
Figure 3.3 shows the Name Voyager, which was created for ex-
pectant parents deciding what to name their new baby. When the
user types characters of a name, the vis shows data for the popu-
larity of names in the United States since 1900 that start with that
sequence of characters. The tool uses the visual encoding idiom
where each name has a stripe whose height corresponds to popu-
larity at a given time. Currently popular names are brighter, and
gender is encoded by color. The Name Voyager appealed to many
people with no interest in having children, who analyzed many dif-
ferent historical trends and posted extensively about their findings
in their personal blogs, motivated by their own enjoyment rather
than a pressing need [Wattenberg 05].
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 74 ---
ο ο
ο ο
3.4. Actions 49
Figure 3.3. Name Voyager, a vis tool originally intended for parents focused deciding on what to name their expected
baby, ended up being used by many nonparents to analyze historical trends for their own enjoyment. Left: Names
starting with ‘O’ had a notable dip in popularity in the middle of the century. Right: Names starting with ‘LAT’ show
a trend of the 1970s. After [Wattenberg 05, Figures 2 and 3], using http://www.babynamewizard.com.
3.4.2 Produce
In contrast to using vis only for consuming existing information, in
the produce case the intent of the user is to generate new material.
Often the goal with produce is to produce output that is used im-
mediately, as input to a next instance. Sometimes the user intends
to use this new material for some other vis-related task later on,
such as discovery or presentation. Sometimes the intended use of
the new material is for some other purpose that does not require
vis, such as downstream analysis using nonvisual tools. There are
three kinds of produce goals: annotate, record, and derive.
3.4.2.1 Annotate
The annotate goal refers to the addition of graphical or textual an-
notations associated with one or more preexisting visualization el-
ements, typically as a manual action by the user. When an annota-
tion is associated with data items, the annotation could be thought ‣ Attributes are covered in
of as a new attribute for them. For example, the user could anno- Chapter 2.
tate all of the points within a cluster with a text label.
3.4.2.2 Record
The record goal saves or captures visualization elements as persis-
tent artifacts. These artifacts include screen shots, lists of book-
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 75 ---
ο ο
ο ο
50 3. Why: TaskAbstraction
Figure 3.4. Graphical history recorded during an analysis session with Tableau. From [Heer et al. 08, Figure 1].
marked elements or locations, parameter settings, interaction logs,
or annotations. The record choice saves a persistent artifact, in
contrast to the annotate, which attaches information temporarily
to existing elements; an annotation made by a user can subse-
quently be recorded. One interesting example of a record goal is
to assemble a graphical history, in which the output of each task
includes a static snapshot of the view showing its current state,
and these snapshots accumulate in a branching meta-visualization
showing what occurred during the user’s entire session of using
the vis tool. Figure 3.4 shows an example from the Tableau vis
tool [Heer et al. 08]. Recording and retaining artifacts such as these
are often desirable for maintaining a sense of analytical prove-
nance, allowing users to revisit earlier states or parameter settings.
3.4.2.3 Derive
The derive goal is to produce new data elements based on existing
data elements. New attributes can be derived from information
contained within existing ones, or data can be transformed from
one type into another. Deriving new data is a critical part of the vis
design process. The common case is that deriving new data is a
choice made by vis designers, but this choice could also be driven
by a user of a vis tool.
When you are faced with a dataset, you should always consider
whether to simply use it as is, or to transform it to another form:
you could create newly derived attributes from the original ones, or
even transform the dataset from the original type to another one.
There is a strong relationship between the form of the data—
the attribute and dataset types—and what kinds of vis idioms are
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 76 ---
ο ο
ο ο
3.4. Actions 51
effective at displaying it. The good news is that your hands are
not tied as a designer because you can transform the data into a
form more useful for the task at hand. Don’t just draw what you’re
given; decide what the right thing to show is, create it with a series
of transformations from the original dataset, and draw that!
The ability to derive new data is why the data abstraction used
in a vis tool is an active choice on the part of the designer, rather
than simply being dictated by what the user provides. Changing
the dataset to another form by deriving new attributes and types
greatly expands the design space of possible vis idioms that you
can use to display it. The final data abstraction that you choose
might simply be the dataset in its original form, but more complex
data abstractions based on deriving new attributes and types are
frequently necessary if you’re designing a vis tool for a complex,
real-world use case. Similarly, when you consider the design of
an existing vis system, understanding how the original designer
chose to transform the given dataset should be a cornerstone of
your analysis.
A dataset often needs to be transformed beyond its original state
in order to create a visual encoding that can solve the desired prob-
lem. To do so, we can create derived attributes that extend the
dataset beyond the original set of attributes that it contains.* * A synonym for derive is
In some cases, the derived attribute encodes the same data as transform.
the original, but with a change of type. For example, a dataset
might have an original attribute that is quantitative data: for in-
stance, floating point numbers that represent temperature. For
some tasks, like finding anomalies in local weather patterns, that
raw data might be used directly. For another task, like deciding
whether water is an appropriate temperature for a shower, that
quantitative attribute might be transformed into a new derived at-
tribute that is ordered: hot, warm, or cold. In this transformation,
most of the detail is aggregated away. In a third example, when
making toast, an even more lossy transformation into a binary cat-
egorical attribute might suffice: burned or not burned.
In other cases, creating the derived attribute requires access
to additional information. For a geographic example, a categorical
attribute of city name could be transformed into two derived quan-
titative attributes containing the latitude and longitude of the city.
This transformation could be accomplished through a lookup to a
separate, external database.
A new derived attribute may be created using arithmetic, log-
ical, or statistical operations ranging from simple to complex. A
common simple operation is subtracting two quantitative attributes
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 77 ---
O O
O O
52 3. Why: TaskAbstraction
exports
imports
t r a d e
b a l a n c e
trade balance = expor ts − impor ts
Original Data Derived Data
(a) (b)
Figure 3.5. Derived attributes can be directly visually encoded. (a) Two original
data attributes are plotted, imports and exports. (b) The quantitative derived at-
tribute of trade balance, the difference between the two originals, can be plotted
directly.
to create a new quantitative difference attribute, which can then be
directly visually encoded. Figure 3.5 shows an example of encod-
ing two attributes directly, versus encoding the derived variable of
the difference between them. For tasks that require understanding
this difference, Figure 3.5(b) is preferable because it encodes the
difference directly. The user can interpret the information by judg-
ing position along a common frame. In contrast, in Figure 3.5(a)
the user must judge the difference in heights between the two orig-
inal curves at each step, a perceptual operation that is more diffi-
cult and demanding. This operation is simple because it is local-
ized to a pair of attribute values; a more complex operation would
require global computations across all values for an attribute, such
as averaging for a single attribute or the correlation between two of
them.
Datasets can be transformed into new ones of a different type,
just as new attributes can be derived from existing ones. The
full process of creating derived data may involve multiple stages
of transformation.
For example, the VxInsight system transforms a table of ge-
nomics data into a network through a multistage derivation pro-
cess by first creating a quantitative derived attribute of similarity,
and then creating a derived network with links only between the
most similar items [Davidson et al. 01]. The table had 6000 rows
of yeast genes, and 18 columns containing measurements of the
gene activity level in a specific experimental condition. The values
in the columns were used to derive a new attribute, the similar-
O O
O O

--- PAGE 78 ---
ο ο
ο ο
3.4. Actions 53
ity score, defined between each pair of genes. The similarity score
was computed using sophisticated statistical processing to be ro-
bust in the presence of nonlinear and noisy data, as occurs in this
sort of biological application. This derived attribute was then used
to create a derived network, where the nodes in the network were
genes. A link was established between two genes when the simi-
larity score was high; specifically, links were created only for the
top 20 similarity scores.
3.4.3 Search
All of the high-level analyze cases require the user to search for
elements of interest within the vis as a mid-level goal.* The classi- * The verb find is often
fication of search into four alternatives is broken down according used as a synonym in de-
to whether the identity and location of the search target is already scriptions of search tasks,
known or not. implying a successful out-
come.
3.4.3.1 Lookup
If users already know both what they’re looking for and where it
is, then the search type is simply lookup. For example, a user
of a tree vis showing the ancestral relationships between mammal
species might want to look up humans, and can get to the right
spot quickly by remembering how humans are classified: they’re
in the group that has live young rather than laying eggs like a
platypus or having a pouch like kangaroos, and within that group
humans fall into the category of primates.
3.4.3.2 Locate
To find a known target at an unknown location, the search type is
locate: that is, find out where the specific object is. In a similar
example, the same user might not know where to find rabbits, and
would have to look around in a number of places before locating
them as lagomorphs (not rodents)!
3.4.3.3 Browse
In contrast, the exact identity of a search target might not be
known in advance; rather, it might be specified based on char-
acteristics. In this case, users are searching for one or more items
that fit some kind of specification, such as matching up with a
particular range of attribute values. When users don’t know ex-
actly what they’re looking for, but they do have a location in mind
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 79 ---
ο ο
ο ο
54 3. Why: TaskAbstraction
of where to look for it, the search type is browse. For instance,
if a user of a tree vis is searching within a particular subtree for
leaf nodes having few siblings, it would be an instance of browse
because the location is known in advance, even though the exact
identity of the search target isn’t. Another example of browsing is a
user of a vis tool with the visual encoding idiom of a line graph dis-
playing the share price of multiple companies over the past month,
who examines the share price of each line on June 15.
3.4.3.4 Explore
When users are not even sure of the location, the search type is
explore. It entails searching for characteristics without regard to
their location, often beginning from an overview of everything. Ex-
amples include searching for outliers in a scatterplot, for anoma-
lous spikes or periodic patterns in a line graph of time-series data,
or for unanticipated spatially dependent patterns in a choropleth
map.
3.4.4 Query
Once a target or set of targets for a search has been found, a low-
level user goal is to query these targets at one of three scopes:
identify, compare, or summarize. The progression of these three
corresponds to an increase in the amount of search targets under
consideration: one, some, or all. That is, identify refers to a single
target, compare refers to multiple targets, and summarize refers to
the full set of possible targets.
For a concrete example, consider different uses of a choropleth
map of US election results, where each state is color-coded by the
party that won. A user can identify the election results for one
state, compare the election results of one state to another, or sum-
marize the election results across all states to determine how many
favored one candidate or the other or to determine the overall dis-
tribution of margin of victory values.
3.4.4.1 Identify
The scope of identify is a single target. If a search returns known
targets, either by lookup or locate, then identify returns their char-
acteristics. For example, a user of a static map that represents
US election results by color coding each state red or blue, with the
saturation level of either hue showing the proportion, can identify
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 80 ---
ο ο
ο ο
3.5. Targets 55
the winning party and margin of victory for the state of California.
Conversely, if a search returns targets matching particular charac-
teristics, either by browse or explore, then identify returns specific
references. For instance, the election map user can identify the
state having the highest margin of victory.
3.4.4.2 Compare
The scope of compare is multiple targets. Comparison tasks are
typically more difficult than identify tasks and require more so-
phisticated idioms to support the user. For example, the capability
of inspecting a single target in detail is often necessary, but not
sufficient, for comparison.
3.4.4.3 Summarize
The scope of summarize task is all possible targets. A synonym for
summarize is overview, a term is frequently used in the vis liter-
ature both as a verb, where it means to provide a comprehensive
view of everything, and as a noun, where it means a summary dis- ‣ Section 6.7 discusses the
play of everything. The goal of providing an overview is extremely question of how and when
common in visualization. to provide overviews.
3.5 Targets
Figure 3.6 shows four kinds of abstract targets. The actions dis-
cussed above refer to a target, meaning some aspect of the data
that is of interest to the user. Targets are nouns, whereas actions
are verbs. The idea of a target is explicit with search and query
actions. It is more implicit with the use actions, but still relevant:
for example, the thing that the user presents or discovers.
Three high-level targets are very broadly relevant, for all kinds * Indeed, a synonym for
of data: trends, outliers, and features. A trend is a high-level char- trend is simply pattern.
acterization of a pattern in the data.* Simple examples of trends in-
clude increases, decreases, peaks, troughs, and plateaus. Almost * There are many other
inevitably, some data doesn’t fit well with that backdrop; those el- synonyms for outliers, in-
ements are the outliers.* The exact definition of features is task cluding anomalies, novel-
dependent, meaning any particular structures of interest. ties, deviants, and sur-
Attributes are specific properties that are visually encoded. The prises.
lowest-level target for an attribute is to find an individual value.
‣ Attributes are discussed
Another frequent target of interest is to find the extremes: the
in detail in Chapter 2.
minimum or maximum value across the range. A very common
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 81 ---
ο ο
ο ο
56 3. Why: TaskAbstraction
Targets
All Data
Trends Outliers Features
Attributes
One Many
Distribution Dependency Correlation Similarity
Extremes
Network Data
Topology
Paths
Spatial Data
Shape
Figure 3.6. The goals of the user might be to find or understand specific aspects
of the data: trends and outliers for all kinds of data; individual values, the minimum
or maximum extremes of the range, or the entire distribution of a single attribute; or
the dependencies, correlations, or similarities between multiple attributes; topology
or paths for network data, and shape for spatial data.
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 82 ---
ο ο
ο ο
3.6. How: APreview 57
target that has high-level scope is the distribution of all values for
an attribute.
Some targets encompass the scope of multiple attributes: de-
pendencies, correlations, and similarities between attributes. A first
attribute can have a dependency on a second, where the values for
the first directly depend on those of the second. There is a correla-
tion between one attribute and another if there is a tendency for the
values of second to be tied to those of the first. The similarity be-
tween two attributes can be defined as a quantitative measurement
calculated on all of their values, allowing attributes to be ranked
with respect to how similar, or different, they are from each other.
The abstract tasks of understanding trends, outliers, distribu-
tions, and correlations are extremely common reasons to use vis.
Each of them can be expressed in very diverse terms using domain-
specific language, but you should be on the lookout to recognize
these abstractions.
Some targets pertain to specific types of datasets. Network data ‣ The network datatype is
specifies relationships between nodes as links. The fundamental covered in Section 2.4.2,
target with network data is to understand the structure of these and choices for how ar-
interconnections; that is, the network’s topology. A more specific range networks are covered
topological target is a path of one or more links that connects two in Chapter 9.
nodes. For spatial data, understanding and comparing the geo-
metric shape is the common target of user actions.
‣ Section 2.4.3.1 covers
the dataset type of spa-
3.6 How: A Preview
tial fields, and Section 2.4.4
covers geometry. Choices
The third part of an analysis instance trio is how a vis idiom can for arranging spatial data
be constructed out of a set of design choices. Figure 3.7 provides are covered in Chapter 8.
a preview of these choices, with a high-level breakdown into four
major classes.
The family of how to encode data within a view has five choices
for how to arrange data spatially: express values; separate, order,
and align regions; and use given spatial data. This family also in-
cludes how to map data with all of the nonspatial visual channels
including color, size, angle, shape, and many more. The manipu-
late family has the choices of change any aspect of the view, select
elements from within the view, and navigate to change the view-
point within the view—an aspect of change with a rich enough set
of choices to merit its own category. The family of how to facet
data between views has choices for how to juxtapose and coordi-
nate multiple views, how to partition data between views, and how
to superimpose layers on top of each other. The family of how to
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 83 ---
ο ο
ο ο
58 3. Why: TaskAbstraction
How?
Encode Manipulate Facet Reduce
Arrange Change Juxtapose Filter
Express Separate
Order Align Select Partition Aggregate
Use
Navigate Superimpose Embed
Map
from categorical and ordered
attributes
Color
Hue S aturation Luminance
Size, Angle, Cur vature, ...
Shape
What?
Motion Why?
Direction, Rate, Frequenc y, ...
How?
Figure 3.7. How to design vis idioms: encode, manipulate, facet, and reduce.
reduce the data shown has the options of filter data away, aggre-
gate many data elements together, and embed focus and context
information together within a single view.
The rest of this book defines, describes, and discusses these
choices in depth.
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 84 ---
ο ο
ο ο
3.7. AnalyzingandDeriving: Examples 59
3.7 Analyzing and Deriving: Examples
The three analysis and derivation examples below give a taste of
how this what–why–how framework can be used right away. The
first example covers comparative analysis between two vis tools.
The second example discusses deriving a single attribute, an im-
portance measure for trees to decide which branches to show to
summarize its topological structure. The third example covers de-
riving many new attributes and augmenting a spatial fluid dynam-
ics dataset by creating derived spaces in which features of interest
are easy to find.
3.7.1 Comparing Two Idioms
The what–why–how analysis framework is useful for comparative
analysis, for example, to examine two different vis tools that have
different answers for the question of how the idiom is designed
when used for exactly the same context of why and what at the
abstraction level.
SpaceTree [Plaisant et al. 02], shown in Figure 3.8(a), and Tree-
Juxtaposer [Munzner et al. 03], shown in Figure 3.8(b), are tree vis
(a) (b)
Figure 3.8. Comparing two idioms. (a) SpaceTree [Plaisant et al. 02]. (b) TreeJuxtaposer. From http://www.cs.umd.
edu/hcil/spacetree and [Munzner et al. 03, Figure 1].
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 85 ---
ο ο
ο ο
60 3. Why: TaskAbstraction
What? Why? How?
Tree Ac tions SpaceTree
Present Locate Identify Encode Navigate Selec t Filter Aggregate
Targets TreeJux taposer
Path bet ween t wo nodes Encode Navigate Selec t Arrange
Figure 3.9. Analyzing what–why–how comparatively for the SpaceTree and TreeJuxtaposer idioms.
tools that use somewhat different idioms. What these tools take as
input data is the same: a large tree composed of nodes and links.
Why these tools are being used is for the same goal in this sce-
nario: to present a path traced between two nodes of interest to a
colleague. In more detail, both tools can be used to locate paths
between nodes and identify them.
Some aspects of idioms are the same: both systems allow the
user to navigate and to select a path, with the result that it’s en-
coded differently from the nonselected paths through highlighting.
The systems differ in how elements of the visualization are ma-
nipulated and arranged. SpaceTree ties the act of selection to a
change of what is shown by automatically aggregating and filtering
the unselected items. In contrast, TreeJuxtaposer allows the user
to arrange areas of the tree to ensure visibility for areas of interest.
Figure 3.9 summarizes this what–why–how analyis.
3.7.2 Deriving One Attribute
In a vis showing a complex network or tree, it is useful to be able to
filter out most of the complexity by drawing a simpler picture that
communicates the key aspects of its topological structure. One
way to support this kind of summarization is to calculate a new
derived attribute that measures the importance of each node in
the graph and filter based on that attribute. Many different ap-
proaches to calculating importance have been proposed; centrality
metrics do so in a way that takes into account network topology.
The Strahler number is a measure of node importance originally
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 86 ---
ο ο
ο ο
3.7. AnalyzingandDeriving: Examples 61
(a) (b)
Figure 3.10. The derived quantitative attribute of Strahler numbers is used to filter
the tree in order to create a recognizable summary. (a) The important skeleton of
a large tree is visible when only 5000 of the highest-ranked nodes are drawn. (b)
The full tree has over a half million nodes. From [Auber 02, Figures 10 and 13].
developed in hydrogeology to characterize the branching structure
of rivers that has been adapted and extended for use visualizing
trees and networks [Auber 02]. Very central nodes have large
Strahler numbers, whereas peripheral nodes have low values. The
Strahler number is an example of a derived attribute for network
data that is the result of a complex and global computation, rather
than simply a local calculation on a small neighborhood around a
node.
Figure 3.10 shows an example of filtering according to the Strah-
ler derived attribute to summarize a tree effectively. The result of
drawing only the top-ranked 5000 nodes and the links that con-
nect them is a recognizable skeleton of the full tree, shown in
Figure 3.10(a), while over a half million nodes are shown in Fig-
ure 3.10(b). In contrast, if the 5000 nodes to draw were picked ran-
domly, the structure would not be understandable. Both versions
of the network are also colored according to the Strahler number,
to show how the centrality measure varies within the network.
To summarize this example concisely in terms of a what–why–
how analysis, as shown in Figure 3.11, a new quantitative attribute
is derived and used to filter away the peripheral parts of a tree, in
support of the task of summarizing the tree’s overall topology. As in
the previous example, the tree is encoded as a node–link diagram,
the most common choice for tree and network arrangment.
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 87 ---
ο ο
ο ο
62 3. Why: TaskAbstraction
Task 1 Task 2
.58 .74 .58 .74
.64 .64
.54 .84 .54 .84
.74 .84 .74 .84
.24 .84 .64 .24 .84 .64
.94 .94
I n Out I n I n Out
Tree Quantitative Tree + Quantitative Filtered tree
attribute on nodes attribute on nodes Removed
unimpor tant par ts
What? Why? What? Why? How?
In Tree Derive In Tree Summarize Reduce
Out Quantitative In Quantitative attribute on nodes Topology Filter
attribute on nodes Out Filtered tree
Figure 3.11. Analyzing a chained sequence of two instances where an attribute is derived in order to summarize a
tree by filtering away the unimportant parts.
3.7.3 Deriving Many New Attributes
Data transformations can shed light into spatial data as well. In an
example from computational fluid dynamics, linked derived spaces
are used for feature detection [Henze 98]. The vis system shown
in Figure 3.12 allows the user to quickly create plots of any two
original or derived variables from the palette of variables shown
‣ Multiple views are dis- in the upper left derived fields pane. The views are linked together
cussed further in Chap- with color highlighting. The power of this idiom lies in seeing where
ter 12. regions that are contiguous in one view fall in the other views.
The original dataset is a time-varying spatial field with measure-
ments along a curvilinear mesh fitted to an airfoil. The plot in the
physical space pane on the upper right of Figure 3.12 shows the
data in this physical space, using the two spatial field variables.
Undisturbed airflow enters the physical space from the left, and
the back tip of the airfoil is on the right. Two important regions
in back of the airfoil are distinguished with color: a red recircula-
tion region and a yellow wake region. While these regions are not
easy to distinguish in this physical view, they can be understood
and selected more easily by interaction with the four other derived
views. For example, in the derived space of vorticity vs enthalpy in
the upper middle of Figure 3.12, the recirculation zone is distin-
guishable as a coherent spatial structure at the top, with the yellow
wake also distinguishable beneath it. As the white box shows, the
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 88 ---
ο ο
ο ο
3.7. AnalyzingandDeriving: Examples 63
Figure 3.12. Computational fluid dynamics vis showing the list of many derived attributes (top left), one view of
the original spatial field (top right), and four other views showing pairs of selected derived attributes. The multiple
juxtaposed views are coordinated with shared colored highlights. From [Henze 98, Figure 5].
recirculation zone can easily be selected in this view. The pressure
vs temperature pane in the bottom middle of Figure 3.12 shows an-
other derived space made by plotting the pressure versus the tem-
perature. In this view, the red recirculation zone and the yellow
wake appear where both the pressure and temperature variables
are high, in the upper right. Without getting into the exact tech-
nical meaning of the derived variables as used in fluid dynamics
(vorticity, entropy, enthalpy, and so on), the point of this example
is that many structures of interest in fluid dynamics can be seen
more easily from layouts in the derived spaces.
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 89 ---
ο ο
ο ο
64 3. Why: TaskAbstraction
Task 1 Task 2
I n Out I n I n Out
Spatial field Many quantitative Spatial field + M any quantitative Jux taposed attribute plots with
attributes attributes linked coloring
What? Why? What? Why? How?
In Spatial field Derive In Spatial field Ac tions Map Arrange
Out Many In Many quantitative Discover Hue Express
quantitative attributes Explore
attributes Out Jux taposed Browse Facet Manipulate
attribute plots with Identify Jux tapose Selec t
linked coloring Compare Par tition Navigate
Targets
Features
Figure 3.13. Analyzing a chained sequence, where many attributes are derived and visually encoded.
To summarize this example in terms of a what–why–how analy-
sis, as shown in Figure 3.13, many new quantitative attributes are
derived from an original spatial field dataset. Each pair of them
is visually encoded into a view, as is the original spatial data, and
the multiple juxtaposed views are coordinated with shared color
coding and highlighting.
3.8 Further Reading
The Big Picture An earlier version of the what–why–how framework
was first presented as a paper [Brehmer and Munzner 13],
which includes a very detailed discussion of its relationship
to the extensive previous work in classifications of tasks and
interaction idioms. That discussion covers 30 previous clas-
sifications and 20 relevant references, ranging from a charac-
terization of the scientific data analysis process [Springmeyer
et al. 92], to an influential low-level task classification [Amar
et al. 05], to a taxonomy of tasks for network datasets [Lee
et al. 06], to a recent taxonomy of interaction dynamics [Heer
and Shneiderman 12].
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 90 ---
ο ο
ο ο
3.8. FurtherReading 65
Who: Designers versus Users Some of the challenges inherent in bridg-
ing the gaps between vis designers and users are discussed
in an influential paper [van Wijk 06].
Derive Many vis pipeline models discuss the idea of data trans-
formation as a critical early step [Card et al. 99, Chi and
Riedl 98], and others also point out the need to transform be-
tween different attribute types [Velleman and Wilkinson 93].
A later taxonomy of vis explicitly discusses the idea that data
types can change as the result of the transformation [Tory
and Mo¨ller 04b].
Examples The analysis examples are SpaceTree [Plaisant et al. 02],
TreeJuxtaposer [Munzner et al. 03], Strahler numbers for tree
simplification [Auber 02], and linked derived spaces for fea-
ture detection [Henze 98].
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 91 ---
ο ο
ο ο
Domain situation
Obser ve target users using existing tools
D a ta/ task a bstr a c tion
Visua l e n c o d ing/ i n t e r a c tio n idio m
Justify design with respec t to alternatives
A lgo rith m
Measure system time/memor y
Analyze computational complexity
Analyze results qualitatively
Measure human time with lab experiment (lab study)
Obser ve target users af ter deployment ( )
Measure adoption
Figure 4.1. The four nested levels of vis design have different threats to validity at each level, and validation
approaches should be chosen accordingly.
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 92 ---
ο ο
ο ο
Chapter 4
Analysis: Four Levels for Validation
4.1 The Big Picture
Figure 4.1 shows four nested levels of design: domain situation,
task and data abstraction, visual encoding and interaction idiom,
and algorithm. The task and data abstraction level addresses the
why and what questions, and the idiom level addresses the ques-
tion of how. Each of these levels has different threats to validity, so
it’s a good idea to choose your validation method with these levels
in mind.
4.2 Why Validate?
Validation is important for the reasons discussed in Chapter 1: the
vis design space is huge, and most designs are ineffective. In that
chapter, I also discuss the many reasons that validation is a tricky
problem that is difficult to get right. It’s valuable to think about
how you might validate your choices from the very beginning of
the design process, rather than leaving these considerations for
the end as an afterthought.
This chapter introduces two more levels of design to consider,
one above the why–what abstraction level and one below the how
idiom level. While this book focuses on the two middle levels, con-
sidering all four is helpful when thinking about how to validate
whether a given design has succeeded.
4.3 Four Levels of Design
Splitting the complex problem of vis design into four cascading lev-
els provides an analysis framework that lets you address different
concerns separately. Figure 4.2 shows these four levels.
67
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 93 ---
ο ο
ο ο
68 4. Analysis: FourLevelsforValidation
Domain situation
Dat a/task abstra c tion
Visual enco ding/int e ra c tion idiom
Al gorithm
Figure 4.2. The four nested levels of vis design.
At the top is the situation level, where you consider the details
of a particular application domain for vis. Next is the what–why
abstraction level, where you map those domain-specific problems
and data into forms that are independent of the domain. The fol-
lowing how level is the design of idioms that specify the approach
to visual encoding and interaction. Finally, the last level is the
design of algorithms to instantiate those idioms computationally.
These levels are nested; the output from an upstream level above
is input to the downstream level below. A block is the outcome of
the design process at that level. The challenge of this nesting is
that choosing the wrong block at an upstream level inevitably cas-
cades to all downstream levels. If you make a poor choice in the
abstraction stage, then even perfect choices at the idiom and algo-
rithm levels will not result in a vis system that solves the intended
problem.
The value of separating these concerns into four levels is that
you can separately analyze the question of whether each level has
been addressed correctly, independently of whatever order design
decisions were made in the process of building the vis tool. Al-
though I encourage you to consider these four levels separately for
analysis, in practice you wouldn’t finalize design decisions at one
level before moving on to the next. Vis design is usually a highly
iterative refinement process, where a better understanding of the
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 94 ---
ο ο
ο ο
4.3. FourLevelsofDesign 69
blocks at one level will feed back and forward into refining the
blocks at the other levels. Thus, it is one of many examples of the
principle of design as redesign [Green 89].
4.3.1 Domain Situation
Blocks at this top level describe a specific domain situation, which
encompasses a group of target users, their domain of interest, their
questions, and their data. The term domain is frequently used in
the vis literature to mean a particular field of interest of the target
users of a vis tool, for example microbiology or high-energy physics
or e-commerce. Each domain usually has its own vocabulary for
describing its data and problems, and there is usually some exist-
ing workflow of how the data is used to solve their problems. The
group of target users might be as narrowly defined as a handful
of people working at a specific company, or as broadly defined as
anybody who does scientific research.
One example of a situation block is a computational biologist
working in the field of comparative genomics, using genomic se-
quence data to ask questions about the genetic source of adaptiv-
ity in a species [Meyer et al. 09]. While one kind of situation is a
specific set of users whose questions about their data arise from
their work, situations arise in other contexts. For example, an-
other situation is members of the general public making medical
decisions about their healthcare in the presence of uncertainty [Mi-
callef et al. 12].
At this level, situation blocks are identified : the outcome of
the design process is an understanding that the designer reaches
about the needs of the user. The methods typically used by de-
signers to identify domain situation blocks include interviews, ob-
servations, or careful research about target users within a specific
domain.
Developing a clear understanding of the requirements of a par-
ticular target audience is a tricky problem for a designer.* While * Working closely with a
it might seem obvious to you that it would be a good idea to un- specific target audience to
derstand requirements, it’s a common pitfall for designers to cut iteratively refine a design
corners by making assumptions rather than actually engaging with is called user-centered de-
any target users. sign or human-centered
In most cases users know they need to somehow view their data, design in the human–com-
but they typically cannot directly articulate their analysis needs in puter interaction literature.
a clear-cut way. Eliciting system requirements is not easy, even
when you have unfettered access to target users fluent in the vo-
cabulary of the domain and immersed in its workflow. Asking
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 95 ---
ο ο
ο ο
70 4. Analysis: FourLevelsforValidation
users to simply introspect about their actions and needs is no-
toriously insufficient: what users say they do when reflecting on
their past behavior gives you an incomplete picture compared with
what they actually do if you observe them.
The outcome of identifying a situation block is a detailed set of
questions asked about or actions carried out by the target users,
about a possibly heterogeneous collection of data that’s also un-
derstood in detail. Two of the questions that may have been asked
by the computational biologist working in comparative genomics
working above were “What are the differences between individual
nucleotides of feature pairs?” and “What is the density of coverage
and where are the gaps across a chromosome?” [Meyer et al. 09].
In contrast, a very general question such as “What is the genetic
basis of disease?” is not specific enough to be useful as input to
the next design level.
4.3.2 Task and Data Abstraction
Design at the next level requires abstracting the specific domain
questions and data from the domain-specific form that they have
at the top level into a generic representation. Abstracting into the
domain-independent vocabulary allows you to realize how domain
situation blocks that are described using very different language
might have similar reasons why the user needs the vis tool and
what data it shows.
Questions from very different domain situations can map to the
same abstract vis tasks. Examples of abstract tasks include brows-
ing, comparing, and summarizing. Task blocks are identified by
the designer as being suitable for a particular domain situation
‣ Chapter 3 covers abstract block, just as the situation blocks themselves are identified at the
tasks in detail. level above.
Abstract data blocks, however, are designed. Selecting a data
block is a creative design step rather than simply an act of identifi-
cation. While in some cases you may decide to use the data in ex-
actly the way that it was identified in the domain situation, you will
often choose to transform the original data from its upstream form
to something quite different. The data abstraction level requires
you to consider whether and how the same dataset provided by a
user should be transformed into another form. Many vis idioms
are specific to a particular data type, such as a table of numbers
where the columns contain quantitative, ordered, or categorical
data; a node–link graph or tree; or a field of values at every point
in space. Your goal is to determine which data type would support
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 96 ---
ο ο
ο ο
4.3. FourLevelsofDesign 71
a visual representation of it that addresses the user’s problem. Al- ‣ Chapter 2 covers ab-
though sometimes the original form of the dataset is a good match stract data types, and Sec-
for a visual encoding that solves the problem, often a transforma- tion 3.4.2.3 discusses trans-
tion to another data type provides a better solution. forming and deriving data.
Explicitly considering the choices made in abstracting from
domain-specific to generic tasks and data can be very useful in the
vis design process. The unfortunate alternative is to do this ab-
straction implicitly and without justification. For example, many
early web vis papers implicitly posited that solving the “lost in hy-
perspace” problem should be done by showing the searcher a vi-
sual representation of the topological structure of the web’s hyper-
link connectivity graph. In fact, people do not need an internal
mental representation of this extremely complex structure to find
a page of interest. Thus, no matter how cleverly the information
was visually encoded at the idiom design level, the resulting vis
tools all incurred additional cognitive load for the user rather than
reducing it.
4.3.3 Visual Encoding and Interaction Idiom
At the third level, you decide on the specific way to create and
manipulate the visual representation of the abstract data block
that you chose at the previous level, guided by the abstract tasks
that you also identified at that level. I call each distinct possible
approach an idiom. There are two major concerns at play with
idiom design. One set of design choices covers how to create a sin-
gle picture of the data: the visual encoding idiom controls exactly
what users see. Another set of questions involves how to manip-
ulate that representation dynamically: the interaction idiom con-
trols how users change what they see. For example, the Word Tree
system [Wattenberg and Viegas 08] shown in Figure 4.3 combines
the visual encoding idiom of a hierarchical tree representation of
keywords laid out horizontally, preserving information about the
context of their use within the original text, and the interaction
idiom of navigation based on keyword selection. While it’s often
possible to analyze encoding and interaction idioms as separable
decisions, in some cases these decisions are so intertwined that
it’s best to consider the outcome of these choices to be a single
combined idiom.
Idiom blocks are designed: they are the outcome of decisions ‣ Chapters 7 through 14
that you make. The design space of static visual encoding idioms feature a thorough look at
is already enormous, and when you consider how to manipulate the design space of vis id-
them dynamically that space of possibilities is even bigger. The ioms.
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 97 ---
ο ο
ο ο
72 4. Analysis: FourLevelsforValidation
Figure 4.3. Word Tree combines the visual encoding idiom of a hierarchical tree of keywords laid out horizontally
and the interaction idiom of navigation based on keyword selection. From [Wattenberg and Viegas 08, Figure 3].
nested model emphasizes identifying task abstractions and decid-
‣ Chapters 5 and 6 cover ing on data abstractions in the previous level exactly so that you
principles of human percep- can use them to rule out many of the options as being a bad match
tion and memory that are for the goals of the users. You should make decisions about good
relevant for making idiom and bad matches based on understanding human abilities, espe-
design choices. cially in terms of visual perception and memory.
While it’s common for vis tools to provide multiple idioms that
users might choose between, some vis tools are designed to be very
narrow in scope, supporting only a few or even just a single idiom.
4.3.4 Algorithm
The innermost level involves all of the design choices involved in
creating an algorithm: a detailed procedure that allows a computer
to automatically carry out a desired goal. In this case, the goal
is to efficiently handle the visual encoding and interaction idioms
that you chose in the previous level. Algorithm blocks are also
designed, rather than just identified.
You could design many different algorithms to instantiate the
same idiom. For example, one visual encoding idiom for creating
images from a three-dimensional field of measurements, such as
scans created for medical purposes with magnetic resonance imag-
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 98 ---
ο ο
ο ο
4.4. AnglesofAttack 73
ing, is direct volume rendering. Many different algorithms have
been proposed as ways to achieve the requirements of this idiom,
including ray casting, splatting, and texture mapping. You might
determine that some of these are better than others according to
measures such as the speed of the computation, how much com-
puter memory is required, and whether the resulting image is an
exact match with the specified visual encoding idiom or just an
approximation.
The nested model emphasizes separating algorithm design,
where your primary concerns are about computational issues, from
idiom design, where your primary concerns are about human per-
ceptual issues.
Of course, there is an interplay between these levels. For ex-
ample, a design that requires something to change dynamically
when the user moves the mouse may not be feasible if computing
that would take minutes or hours instead of a fraction of a second.
However, clever algorithm design could save the day if you come
up with a way to precompute data that supports a fast enough
response.
4.4 Angles of Attack
There are two common angles of attack for vis design: top down or
bottom up. With problem-driven work, you start at the top domain
situation level and work your way down through abstraction, id-
iom, and algorithm decisions. In technique-driven work, you work
at one of the bottom two levels, idiom or algorithm design, where
your goal is to invent new idioms that better support existing ab-
stractions, or new algorithms that better support existing idioms.
In problem-driven vis, you begin by grappling with the problems
of some real-world user and attempt to design a solution that helps
them work more effectively. In this vis literature, this kind of work
is often called a design study. Often the problem can be solved
using existing visual encoding and interaction idioms rather than
designing new ones, and much of the challenge lies at the abstrac-
tion level. However, sometimes the problem motivates the design
of new idioms, if you decide that no existing ones will adequately
solve the abstracted design problem.
Considering the four levels of nested model explicitly can help
you avoid the pitfall of skipping important steps in problem-driven
work. Some designers skip over the domain situation level com-
pletely, short-circuit the abstraction level by assuming that the
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 99 ---
ο ο
ο ο
74 4. Analysis: FourLevelsforValidation
first abstraction that comes to mind is the correct one, and jump
immediately into the third level of visual encoding and interaction
idiom design. I argue against this approach; the abstraction stage
is often the hardest to get right. A designer struggling to find the
right abstraction may end up realizing that the domain situation
has not yet been adequately characterized and jump back up to
work at that level before returning to this one. As mentioned above,
the design process for problem-driven work is almost never strictly
linear; it involves iterative refinement at all of the levels.
In technique-driven work, your starting point is an idea for a
new visual encoding or interaction idiom, or a new algorithm. In
this style of work, you start directly at one of the two lower levels
and immediately focus design at that level. Considering the nested
model can help you articulate your assumptions at the level just
above your primary focus: either to articulate the abstraction re-
quirements for your new idiom, or to articulate the idiom require-
ments for your algorithm.
The analysis framework of this book is focused on the what–
why abstraction and how idiom levels and is intended to help you
work in either direction. For problem-driven work, it allows you to
work downward when searching for existing idioms by analyzing
what design choices are appropriate for task abstraction that you
have identified and data abstraction that you have chosen. For
technique-driven work, it allows you to work upward by classifying
your proposed idiom within the framework of design choices, giv-
ing you a clear framework in which to discuss its relationship with
previously proposed idioms. Similarly, it is helpful to explicitly an-
alyze a new algorithm with respect to the idioms that it supports.
Although in some cases this analysis is very straightforward, it
can sometimes be tricky to untangle connections between algo-
rithms and idioms. Can your new algorithm simply be switched
for a previous one, providing a faster way to compute the same
visual encoding? Or does your new algorithm result in a visual
encoding different enough to constitutes a new idiom that requires
justification to show it’s a good match for human capabilities and
the intended task?
4.5 Threats to Validity
‣ Section 1.12 presented Validating the effectiveness of a vis design is difficult because there
many questions to consider are so many possible questions on the table. Considering the va-
when validating a vis design. lidity of your decisions at each level of the nested model separately
ο ο
ο ο

--- PAGE 100 ---
ο ο
ο ο
4.6. ValidationApproaches 75
Domain situation
You misunderstood their needs
Dat a/task abstra c tion
You’re showing them the wrong thing
Visual enco ding/int e ra c tion idiom
The way you show it doesn’t work
* I have borrowed the
Al gorithm
evocative phrase threats to
Your code is too slow
validity from the computer
security domain, by way of
the software engineering lit-
erature. I use the word
Figure 4.4. The four nested levels of vis design have different threats to validity at validation rather than eval-
each level. uation to underscore the
idea that validation is re-
quired for every level and
can help you find your way through this thicket of questions about
extends beyond user stud-
validating your decisions, in the same way that the levels also con-
ies and ethnographic obser-
strain the decision-making process itself.
vation to include complex-
Each of the four levels has a different set of threats to valid-
ity analysis and benchmark
ity: that is, different fundamental reasons why you might have
timings. In software engi-
made the wrong choices.* Figure 4.4 summarizes the four classes neering, validation is about
of threats, where they means the target users and you means the
whether you have built the
vis designer: right product, and verifica-
tion is about whether you
. Wrong problem: You misunderstood their needs.
have built the product right.
Similarly, in the simulation
. Wrong abstraction: You’re showing them the wrong thing.
community, validation of
. Wrong idiom: The way you show it doesn’t work. the scientific model with re-
spect to real-world obser-
. Wrong algorithm: Your code is too slow. vations is similarly consid-
ered separately from veri-
fication of the implementa-
4.6 Validation Approaches
tion, and connotes a level
of rigor beyond the methods
Different threats require very different approaches to validation. discussed here. My use of
Figure 4.5 shows a summary of the threats and validation ap- validation includes both of
proaches possible at each level. The rest of this section explains these questions.
ο ο
ο ο