=== PAGE 351 ===
ο ο
ο ο
326 14. Embed: Focus+Context
14.4 Superimpose
Another choice for integrating focus and context is the use of su-
‣ Superimposing layers perimposed layers. In this case, the focus layer is limited to a local
globally is discussed in region, rather than being a global layer that stretches across the
Section 12.5. entire view to cover everything.
Example: Toolglass and Magic Lenses
The Toolglass and Magic Lenses system shown in Figure 14.3 uses a see-
through lens to show color-coded Gaussian curvature in a foreground
layer, atop the background layer consisting of the rest of the 3D scene.
Within the lens, details are shown, and the unchanged remainder of the
other view provides context. The lens layer occludes the region beneath
it. The system handled many different kinds of data with different visual
encodings of it; this example shows 3D spatial data. The curvature lens
shows that the object in the scene that appears to be a perfect sphere
when rendered with standard computer graphics techniques is in fact a
faceted object made from multiple patches.
Figure 14.3. The Toolglass and Magic Lenses idiom provides focus and context
through a superimposed local layer: the see-through lens color codes the patch-
work sphere with Gaussian curvature information and provides a numeric value for
the point at the center. From [Bier et al. 93, Figure 12].
System Toolglass and Magic Lenses
What: Data Spatial, quantitative curvature attribute across sur-
face.
How: Encode Use given, color by curvature.
How: Reduce Embed: superimpose.
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 352 ===
О О
О О
14.5. Distort 327
14.5 Distort
In contrast to using elision or layers, many focus+context idioms
solve the problem of integrating focus and context into a single
view using geometric distortion of the contextual regions to make
room for the details in the focus regions.
There are several major design choices that underlie all geo-
metric distortion idioms. As with the other two choices, there is
the choice of the number of focus regions: is there only a single re-
gion of focus, or does the idiom allow multiple foci? Another choice
is the shape of the focus: is it a radial, rectangular, or a completely
arbitrary shape? A third choice is the extent of the focus: is it
global across the entire image, or constrained to just a local re-
gion? A fourth choice is the interaction metaphor. One possibility
is constrained geometric navigation. Another is moveable lenses,
evocative of the real-world use of a magnifying glass lens. A third
is stretching and squishing a rubber sheet. A fourth is working
with vector fields.
These choices are now illustrated through five examples of dis-
tortion idioms: 3D perspective, fisheye lenses, hyperbolic geome-
try, stretch and squish navigation, and magnification fields.
Example: 3D Perspective
Several early idioms used 3D perspective to provide a global distortion
region with a single focus point. The interaction metaphor was con-
strained geometric navigation. The perspective distortion arising from
Figure 14.4. The Cone Tree system used 3D perspective for focus+context, pro-
viding a global distortion region with a single focus point, and using standard geo-
metric navigation for interaction. From [Card and Mackinlay 99, Figure 10].
О О
О О
=== PAGE 353 ===
О О
О О
328 14. Embed: Focus+Context
the standard 3D computer graphics transformations is a very intuitive
and familiar effect. It was used with the explicit intention of providing a
distortion-based focus+context user experience in many early vis systems,
such as the influential Cone Tree system shown in Figure 14.4 [Robertson
et al. 91].
Although many people found it compelling and expressed a strong pref-
‣ The costs and benefits
erence for it on their first encounter, this approach lost popularity as the
of 3D are discussed in Sec- trade-offs between the costs and benefits of 3D spatial layout for abstract
tion 6.3. information became more understood.
System Cone Trees
What: Data Tree.
How: Encode 3D node–link layout.
How: Reduce Embed: distort with 3D perspective; single global fo-
cus region.
Scale Nodes: thousands.
Example: Fisheye Lens
The fisheye lens distortion idiom uses a single focus with local extent and
radial shape and the interaction metaphor of a draggable lens on top of
the main view. The fisheye idiom provides the same radial distortion effect
as the physical optical lenses used with cameras and for door peepholes.
The lens interaction provides a foreground layer that completely replaces
what is beneath it, like the magic lens idiom, rather than preserving what
is beneath and superimposing additional information on top of it, like the
superimposing layer design choice for faceting data between views. The
lens can be moved with the standard navigation approach of 2D trans-
lation. The mathematics of fisheye distortion is straightforward; modern
graphics hardware supports high performance fisheye lenses using vertex
shaders [Lambert et al. 10].
Figure 14.5 shows two examples of a fisheye lens used with an online
poker player dataset. The scatterplot in Figure 14.5(a) shows the per-
centage of time that a player goes to showdown (playing until people have
to show all of their cards) versus the flop (playing until the point where
three cards are placed face-up on the board). In the dense matrix view
of Figure 14.5(b), blocks representing players are color coded according
to their winning rate, and a space-filling curve is used to lay out these
blocks in order of a specific derived attribute; in this case, a particular
betting strategy. In the parts of the scene under the fisheye lens, the la-
bels are large enough to read; that focus region remains embedded within
О О
О О
=== PAGE 354 ===
О О
О О
14.5. Distort 329
(a) (b)
Figure 14.5. Focus+context with interactive fisheye lens, with poker player data-
set. (a) Scatterplot showing correlation between two strategies. (b) Dense matrix
view showing correlation between a specific complex strategy and the player’s win-
ning rate, encoded by color.
the surrounding context, showing the global pattern within the rest of the
dataset.
Idiom Fisheye Lens
What: Data Any data.
How: Encode Any layout.
How: Reduce Embed: distort with fisheye; single focus, local radial
region, moveable lens interaction metaphor.
Example: Hyperbolic Geometry
The distortion idiom of hyperbolic geometry uses a single radial global
focus with the interaction metaphor of hyperbolic translation. This ap-
proach exploits the mathematics of non-Euclidean geometry to elegantly
accommodate structures such as trees that grow by an exponential fac-
tor, in contrast to standard Euclidean geometry where there is only a
polynomial amount of space available for placing items. An infinite non-
Euclidean plane can be mapped to a finite Euclidean circle, and similarly
an infinite non-Euclidean volume can be mapped to a finite sphere in Eu-
clidean space. The interaction metaphor is hyperbolic translation, which
corresponds to changing the focus point of the projection; the visual effect
О О
О О
=== PAGE 355 ===
О О
О О
330 14. Embed: Focus+Context
Figure 14.6. Animated transition showing navigation through 3D hyperbolic geom-
etry for a file system tree laid out with the H3 idiom, where the first three frames
show hyperbolic translation changing the focus point and the last three show stan-
dard 3D rotation spinning the structure around. From [Munzner 98, Figure 3].
О О
О О
=== PAGE 356 ===
О О
О О
14.5. Distort 331
is changing which items are magnified at the center, versus minimized at
the periphery, for a global effect with similarities to using a fisheye lens
that extends across the entire scene.
Figure 14.6 shows a 3D hyperbolic node–link tree representing the
structure of a file system laid out with the H3 idiom [Munzner 98], through
a sequence of frames from an animated transition as the view changes over
time. The first three frames show hyperbolic translation to change what
part of the tree is magnified, where the subtree on the right side gets larger
as it moves toward the center of projection. The last three frames show
standard rotation to clarify the 3D structure. The rationale for using 3D
‣ The costs and benefits of
rather than 2D was to achieve greater information density, but at the cost using 3D for abstract data
that any single frame is partially occluded. are covered in Section 6.3.
Idiom Hyperbolic Geometry
What: Data Tree or network.
How: Encode Hyperbolic layout.
How: Reduce Embed: distort by projecting from hyperbolic to Eu-
clidean space; single global radial focus; hyperbolic
translation interaction metaphor.
Example: Stretch and Squish Navigation
The stretch and squish navigation idiom uses multiple rectangular foci of
global extent for distortion, and the interaction metaphor where enlarg-
ing some regions causes others to shrink. In this metaphor, the entire
scene is considered to be drawn on a rubber sheet where stretching one
region squishes the rest, as shown in Figures 11.7, 14.7, and 14.8. Fig-
ure 14.7 shows stretch and squish navigation with the TreeJuxtaposer
system [Munzner et al. 03], where Figure 14.7(a) shows two small trees
juxtaposed with linked highlighting and navigation, and Figure 14.7(b)
shows the result of multiple successive stretches within a single large tree.
The borders of the sheet stay fixed so that all items stay visible within the
viewport, although they may be projected to arbitrarily small regions of
the image. The user can choose to separately stretch the rectangular focal
regions in the horizontal and vertical directions.
These figures also illustrate the visual encoding idiom of guaranteed
visibility that ensures that important objects are always visible within the
scene, even if they are very small. Guaranteed visibility is an example
of aggregation that operates at the subpixel level and takes the impor-
tance attribute of each item into account. Standard graphics systems use
assumptions that work well when drawing realistic scenes but are not nec-
essarily true for abstract data. In reality, distant objects are not visually
О О
О О
=== PAGE 357 ===
ο ο
ο ο
332 14. Embed: Focus+Context
(a) (b)
Figure 14.7. TreeJuxtaposer uses stretch and squish navigation with multiple rect-
angular foci for exploring phylogenetic trees. (a) Stretching a single region when
comparing two small trees. (b) Stretching multiple regions within a large tree.
From [Munzner et al. 03, Figures 5 and 1].
Figure 14.8. PRISequenceJuxtaposer supports comparing gene sequences us-
ing the stretch and squish navigation idiom with the guaranteed visibility of marks
representing items with a high importance value, via a rendering algorithm with
custom subpixel aggregation. From [Slack et al. 06, Figure 3].
salient, so it is a reasonable optimization to simply not draw items that
are sufficiently far away. If the viewpoint is moved closer to these objects,
they will become larger on the image plane and will be drawn. However,
in abstract scenes the distance from the camera is a poor stand-in for the
importance value for an object; often an original or derived attribute is
used instead of or in combination with geometric distance. The example
in Figure 14.8 is a collection of gene sequences that are over 16,000 nu-
cleotides in width displayed in a frame of less than 700 pixels wide [Slack
et al. 06]. The red marks that indicate differences between gene sequences
stay visible at all times because they are given a high importance value,
even in very squished regions where hundreds or thousands of items may
fall within a single pixel. Figure 11.7 also illustrates this idiom: the value
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 358 ===
ο ο
ο ο
14.5. Distort 333
used for the box color coding also indicates importance, so the boxes rep-
resenting alerts that are colored red are always visible.
Idiom Stretch and Squish Navigation
What: Data Any data.
How: Encode Any layout.
How: Reduce Embed: distort with stretch and squish; multiple foci,
global rectangular regions, stretch and squish navi-
gation interaction metaphor.
Example: Nonlinear Magnification Fields
The nonlinear magnification fields idiom relies on a general computational
framework featuring multiple foci of arbitrary magnification levels and
shapes, whose scope can be constrained to affect only local regions. The
underlying mathematical framework supports calculations of the implicit
(a)
(b)
Figure 14.9. General frameworks calculate the magnification and minimization fields needed to achieve desired
transformations in the image. (a) Desired transformations. (b) Calculated magnification fields. From [Keahey 98,
Figure 3].
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 359 ===
ο ο
ο ο
334 14. Embed: Focus+Context
magnification field required to achieve a desired transformation effect, as
shown in Figure 14.9(a). The framework supports many possible inter-
action metaphors including lenses and stretchable surfaces. It can also
expose the magnification fields shown in Figure 14.9(b) directly to the user,
for example, to support data-driven magnification trails of moving objects.
Idiom Nonlinear Magnification Fields
What: Data Any data.
How: Encode Any layout.
How: Reduce Embed: distort with magnification fields; multiple
foci, local arbitrary regions, lens or stretch or data-
driven interaction metaphors.
14.6 Costs and Benefits: Distortion
Embedding focus information within surrounding context in a sin-
gle view is one of five major alternatives to showing complex infor-
mation. The other four choices are deriving new data, manipulat-
ing a single changing view, faceting into multiple views, and reduc-
ing the amount of data to show. The trade-offs of cost and benefits
between these five approaches are still not fully understood.
What has gradually become clear is that distortion-based fo-
cus+context in particular has measurable costs, in addition to
whatever benefits it may provide. One cost is the problem that dis-
tance or length judgements are severely impaired, so distortion is a
poor match with any tasks that require such comparisons. Thus,
one of the most successful use cases for geometric distortion is
with exploration of node–link layouts for networks and trees. The
task of understanding the topological structure of the network is
likely to be robust to distortion when that structure is shown us-
ing lines to connect between nodes, or containment to show nested
parent–child node relationships, because precise angle and length
judgements are not necessary.
One potential cost is that users may not be aware of the dis-
tortion, and thus misunderstand the underlying object structure.
This risk is highest when the user is exploring an unfamiliar or
sparse structure, and many idioms incorporate explicit indications
of distortion to lessen this risk. Hyperbolic views typically show
the enclosing circle or sphere, magnification fields often show a
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 360 ===
ο ο
ο ο
14.6. CostsandBenefits: Distortion 335
superimposed grid or shading to imply the height of the stretched
surface.
Even when users do understand the nature of the distortion,
another cost is the internal overhead of maintaining object con-
stancy, which is the understanding that an item seen in two dif-
ferent frames represents the same object, just seen from a dif-
ferent viewpoint. Understanding the underlying shape of a com-
plex structure could require mentally subtracting the effect of the
transformation in order to recognize the relationship between the
components of an image before and after the transformation. Al-
though in most cases we do this calculation almost effortlessly
for standard 3D perspective distortion, the cost of mentally track-
ing general distortions increases as the amount of distortion in-
creases [Lam et al. 06]. Some empirical evidence shows that con-
strained and predictable distortion is better tolerated than more
drastic distortion [Lam and Munzner 10].
The originator of the generalized fisheye view approach has ex-
pressed surprise about the enthusiasm with which others have
embraced distortion and suggests that the question what is be-
ing shown in terms of selective filtering is more central than that
of how it is shown with any specific distortion idiom [Furnas 06].
For example, the fisheye metaphor is not limited to a geometric
lens used after spatial layout; it can be used directly on structured
data, such as a hierarchical document where some sections are
collapsed while others are left expanded.
Figure 14.10 illustrates four different approaches on the same
node–link graph [Lambert et al. 10]: a fisheye lens in Figure
14.10(a), an ordinary magnifying lens in Figure 14.10(b), a neigh-
borhood highlighting idiom using only superimposed layers in Fig-
ure 14.10(c), and a combination of that layering with the Bring
and Go interaction idiom in Figure 14.10(d). Discussing these ex-
amples in detail will shed some light on the costs and benefits of
distortion versus occlusion versus other interaction.
The local fisheye distortion has a small circle region of very high
magnification at the center of the lens surrounded by a larger in-
termediate region that continuously varies from medium magnifi-
cation to very high compression, returning to low compression in
the outer periphery. Although fisheye lenses were developed with
the goal of reducing the viewer’s disorientation, unfortunately they
can be quite disorienting. The continuous magnification change in-
troduces some amount of cognitive load to untangle the underlying
shape from the imposed distortion. Distortion is less problematic
with familiar shapes, like geographic maps of known places, be-
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 361 ===
ο ο
ο ο
336 14. Embed: Focus+Context
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Figure 14.10. Four approaches to graph exploration. (a) Fisheye lens. (b) Magni-
fying lens. (c) Neighborhood highlighting with layering. (d) Neighborhood highlight-
ing with both layering and Bring and Go interaction. From [Lambert et al. 10, Fig-
ures 2a, 2b, 3b, and 4b].
cause people can interpret the distortion as a change to a known
baseline. With unfamiliar structures, it can be difficult to recon-
struct the basic shape by mentally removing the distortion effects.
While these idioms are designed to be used in an interactive set-
ting, where the user quickly moves the lens around and compares
the undistorted to the distorted states, there is still some cognitive
load.
In contrast, the superimposed local magnifying lens has just
two discrete levels: a highly magnified circle of medium size, and
the low-compression periphery of medium size. There is a discon-
tinuous jump between these two levels, where the lens occludes
the immediately surrounding region. In this particular example,
the fisheye lens may be more difficult to use than the magnifying
lens; it is not clear that the benefit of avoiding occlusion is worth
the cost of interpreting the continuous magnification change.
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 362 ===
ο ο
ο ο
14.7. FurtherReading 337
The last two approaches show a specific region of interest, in
this case a local topological neighborhood of nodes reachable within
one or two hops from a chosen target node. The neighborhood
highlighting lens does not distort spatial position at all; it uses lay-
ering by reducing the opacity of items not in that neighborhood,
automatically calculating a lens diameter to accommodate the en-
tire neighborhood. While this approach would not help for tasks
where magnification is critical, such as reading node labels, it does
a good job of supporting path tracing.
A fisheye lens can be interpreted as a temporary warping that
affects the location of all objects within the active region. The Bring
and Go interaction idiom for network data [Moscovich et al. 09] is
also temporary, but selectively changes the location of only specific
objects of interest, by bringing the one-hop neighbors close to the
target node. The layout is designed to simplify the configuration as
much as possible while still preserving direction and relative dis-
tance information, in hopes of minimizing potential disorientation.
This interaction idiom exploits topological structure information to
reduce the cognitive load cost of tracking moving objects: only the
one-hop neighbors move during animated transitions, in contrast
to fisheye lenses that affect the positions of all items within their
span.
14.7 Further Reading
The Big Picture Two extensive surveys discuss a broad set of idioms
that use the choices of changing the viewpoint through nav-
igation, partitioning into multiple views, and embedding fo-
cus into context, including an assessment of the empirical
evidence on the strengths and weaknesses of these three ap-
proaches and guidelines for design [Cockburn et al. 08, Lam
and Munzner 10].
Early Work Early proposals for focus+context interfaces were the Bi-
focal Display [Spence and Apperley 82] and polyfocal car-
tography [Kadmon and Shlomi 78]. An early taxonomy of
distortion-based interfaces introduced the unifying vocabu-
lary of magnification and transformation functions [Leung and
Apperley 94].
Fisheye Views The fundamental idea of generalized fisheye views [Fur-
nas 82,Furnas 86] was followed up 20 years later with a paper
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 363 ===
ο ο
ο ο
338 14. Embed: Focus+Context
questioning the overwhelming emphasis on geometric distor-
tion in the work of many others in the intervening decades
[Furnas 06].
3D Perspective Influential 3D focus+context interfaces from Xerox
PARC included the Perspective Wall [Mackinlay et al. 91] and
Cone Trees [Robertson et al. 91].
Frameworks Two general frameworks for focus+context magnifica-
tion and minimization are elastic presentation spaces [Carpen-
dale et al. 95, Carpendale et al. 96] and nonlinear magnifica-
tion fields [Keahey and Robertson 97].
Hyperbolic Geometry Hyperbolic 2D trees were proposed at Xerox
PARC [Lamping et al. 95] and 3D hyperbolic networks were
investigated at Stanford [Munzner 98].
Stretch and Squish Navigation The TreeJuxtaposer system proposed
the guaranteed visibility idiom and presented algorithms for
stretch and squish navigation of large trees [Munzner et al. 03],
followed by the PRISAD framework that provided further scal-
ability and handled several data types [Slack et al. 06].
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 364 ===
О О
О О
О О
О О
=== PAGE 365 ===
О О
О О
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
(e) (f)
Figure 15.1. Six case studies of full vis systems. (a) Scagnostics, from [Wilkinson et al. 05, Figure 5]. (b) VisDB,
from [Keim and Kriegel 94, Figure 6]. (c) Hierarchical Clustering Explorer, from [Seo and Shneiderman 05, Figure
1]. (d) PivotGraph, from [Wattenberg 06, Figure 5]. (e) InterRing, from [Yang et al. 02, Figure 4]. (f) Constellation,
from [Munzner 00, Figure 5.5].
О О
О О
=== PAGE 366 ===
ο ο
ο ο
Chapter 15
Analysis Case Studies
15.1 The Big Picture
Figure 15.1 shows the six vis systems analyzed in this chapter
as full case studies. The Scagnostics system provides a scalable
summary of large scatterplot matrices through a derived SPLOM
based on classifying the geometric shapes formed by the point dis-
tributions in the original scatterplots [Wilkinson et al. 05, Wilkin-
son et al. 06]. The VisDB system for database vis treats an entire
database as a very large table of data, visually encoding it with
dense and space-filling layouts with items colored according to
their relevance for a specific query [Keim and Kriegel 94]. The Hi-
erarchical Clustering Explorer (HCE) system supports systematic
exploration of a multidimensional tables, such as those represent-
ing microarray measurements of gene expression in the genomics
domain, with an associated hierarchical clustering [Seo and Shnei-
derman 02, Seo and Shneiderman 05]. The PivotGraph system
summarizes networks using the succinct data abstraction of a
derived network created by rolling up groups of nodes and links
into aggregate nodes based on two categorical attributes [Watten-
berg 06]. The InterRing system for tree exploration uses a space-
filling, radial layout with interaction built around a multifocus fo-
cus+context distortion [Yang et al. 02]. The Constellation system
supports browsing a complex multilevel linguistic network with
a layout that encodes query relevance with spatial position and
dynamic layering to avoid the perceptual impact of edge cross-
ings [Munzner 00, Munzner et al. 99].
15.2 Why Analyze Case Studies?
The ability to concisely describe existing systems gives you a firm
foundation for considering the full array of possibilities when you
generate new systems. These case studies illustrate how to use
341
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 367 ===
ο ο
ο ο
342 15. AnalysisCaseStudies
the analysis framework presented in the book to decompose a vis
approach, however complex, into pieces that you can systemati-
cally think about and compare with other approaches. These ex-
amples continue the analysis gradually introduced in the previous
chapters. Now that all design choices have been introduced, each
example has a complete analysis.
At the abstraction level, these analyses include the types and
semantics of the data abstraction including any derived data and
the targeted task abstraction. At the idiom level, the choices are
decomposed into the design choices of how to encode data, facet
data between multiple views, and reduce the data shown within
a view. The analyses also include a discussion of scalability and
continue with the practice of assuming available screen space of
one million pixels in a standard format of 1000 by 1000 pixels.
A few of these systems have simple data abstractions and can
be unambiguously classified as handling a particular simple data-
set type: tables, or networks, or spatial data. Most of them have
more complex data abstractions, which is the common case in real-
world problems. Many of these systems carry out significant trans-
formations of the original data to create derived data and handle
combinations of multiple basic types. Often the system is designed
to support exploration of interesting structure at multiple levels.
The following analyses are descriptive examinations of the fi-
nal design of each system, not prescriptive statements that the
particular choices made by these designers are the only good solu-
tion that fits the requirements. As you read through this chapter,
it is a useful exercise to generate a set of alternatives for each
choice made by these designers and to consider the pros and cons
of each.
15.3 Graph-Theoretic Scagnostics
Graph-theoretic scagnostics is a scalable idiom for the exploration
‣ Scatterplots are dis- of scatterplot matrices, or SPLOMs [Wilkinson et al. 05, Wilkinson
cussed in Section 7.4. et al. 06]. A scagnostics SPLOM is a next step beyond a stan-
dard SPLOM, just as a SPLOM is a step beyond a single scatter-
‣ SPLOMs are an example plot. A single scatterplot supports direct comparison between two
of the design choice of ma- attributes by plotting their values along two spatial axes. A scat-
trix alignments, discussed terplot matrix is the systematic way to compare all possible pairs of
in Section 7.5.2, and small attributes, with the attributes ordered along both the rows and the
multiples, discussed in Sec- columns and one scatterplot at each cell of the matrix. Figure 15.2
tion 12.3.2. shows a SPLOM for a dataset of abalone measurements that has
nine attributes.
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 368 ===
ο ο
ο ο
15.3. Graph-TheoreticScagnostics 343
Figure 15.2. Scatterplot matrices (SPLOM) showing abalone data. From [Wilkinson et al. 05, Figure 1].
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 369 ===
ο ο
ο ο
344 15. AnalysisCaseStudies
The scalability challenge of a SPLOM is that the size of the
matrix grows quadratically. Each individual plot requires enough
screen space to distinguish the points within it, so this idiom does
not scale well past a few dozen attributes.
The idea of scagnostics, short for scatterplot computer-guided
diagnostics, is to identify a small number of measurements that
nicely categorize the shape of the point distributions within each
scatterplot. The nine measures are outlying for outlier detection;
skewed, clumpy, sparse, and striated for point distribution and
density; convex, skinny, and stringy for shape, and monotonic for
the association. Figure 15.3 shows examples of real-world data-
sets rated low, medium, and high with respect to each of these
measures.
These measurements are then shown in a new scagnostics
SPLOM that is a scatterplot of scatterplots. That is, each point
in the scagnostics SPLOM represents an entire scatterplot in the
original SPLOM, which is shown when the point is selected. Fig-
ure 15.4 shows the scagnostics matrix for the abalone dataset. As
with standard SPLOMs, there is linked highlighting between views,
and selecting a point also triggers a popup detail view showing the
full scatterplot.
The idea is that the distribution of points in the scagnostics
SPLOM should provide a fast overview of the most important char-
acteristics of the original SPLOM, because the measures have been
carefully chosen to reflect scatterplot shape. Looking at the out-
liers in this scagnostics SPLOM guides the user to the unusually
shaped, and thus potentially interesting, scatterplots in the origi-
nal SPLOM.
System Scagnostics
What: Data Table.
What: Derived Nine quantitative attributes per scatterplot
(pairwise combination of original attributes).
Why: Tasks Identify, compare, and summarize; distributions
and correlation.
How: Encode Scatterplot, scatterplot matrix.
How: Manipulate Select.
How: Facet Juxtaposed small-multiple views coordinated
with linked highlighting, popup detail view.
Scale Original attributes: dozens.
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 370 ===
ο ο
ο ο
15.3. Graph-TheoreticScagnostics 345
Figure 15.3. The nine scagnostics measures that describe scatterplot shape, with
examples of real-world datasets rated low, medium, and high for each of the nine
measures. From [Wilkinson and Wills 08, Figure 6].
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 371 ===
ο ο
ο ο
346 15. AnalysisCaseStudies
Figure 15.4. Scagnostics SPLOM for the abalone dataset, where each point represents an entire scatterplot in the
original matrix. The selected point is highlighed in red in each view, and the scatterplot corresponding to it is shown
in a popup detail view. From [Wilkinson et al. 05, Figure 5].
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 372 ===
ο ο
ο ο
15.4. VisDB 347
15.4 VisDB
The VisDB system for database vis [Keim and Kriegel 94] treats an
entire database as a very large table of data. The system shows
that table with respect to a specific query that matches some sub-
set of the items in it. VisDB computes a set of derived attributes
that measure the relevance of the query with respect to the orig-
inal attributes and items, as shown in Figure 15.5(a). Each item
is given a relevance score for the query for each original attribute.
An overall relevance score is computed that combines these indi-
vidual scores, adding an additional derived attribute column to the
original table.
VisDB supports two different layout idioms that are dense, space-
filling, and use square color-coded area marks. Figure 15.5 shows
schematic views of the layouts, and Figure 15.6 shows the corre-
sponding screenshots.
The spatial ordering of regions within VisDB views is not a stan-
dard aligned rectilinear or radial layout; it follows a spiral pattern
emanating from the center, as shown in Figure 15.7(a). The se-
quential colormap, shown in Figure 15.7(b), uses multiple hues
ordered with monotonically increasing luminance to support both
categorical and ordered perception of the encoded data. At the
bottom is dark red, the mid-range has purple and blue, it con-
tinues with cyan and then even brighter green, and there is a
very bright yellow at the high end to emphasize the top of the
range.
One of the two layouts partitions the dataset by attribute into
small multiple views shown side by side, with one view for each
attribute. Figure 15.5(a) illustrates the idiom schematically, and
Figure 15.6(a) shows an example with a dataset of 1000 items.
The items are placed in the same order across all views but colored
according to relevance score for that view’s attribute. They are or-
dered by the derived overall relevance attribute, which is also the
coloring attribute in the upper left view; spatial position and color
provide redundant information in this view. In the other views with
coloring by each other attribute, there are different visual patterns
of color. The user can inspect the patterns within the individual
views to carry out the abstract task of characterizing distributions
and finding groups of similar values within individual attributes
and per-attribute outlier detection. Comparing between the pat-
terns in different views corresponds to the abstract task of looking
for correlations between attributes.
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 373 ===
ο ο
ο ο
348 15. AnalysisCaseStudies
relevance factor dimension 1 dimension 2
• • •
one data item • • •
approximately one data item
fulfilling the fulfilling the
query query
• • •
•• • •
dimension 3 dimension 4 dimension 5
(a)
relevance
factor dim. 1 dim. 2
dim. 3 dim. 4 dim. 5
(b)
Figure 15.5. VisDB layouts schematically, for a dataset with five attributes.
(a) Each attribute is shown in a separate small-multiple view. (b) In an alternate
VisDB layout, each item is shown with a glyph with per-attribute sections in a single
combined view. From [Keim and Kriegel 94, Figures 2 and 4].
The second layout uses a single view where the space has been
partitioned into one region for each item, containing a glyph that
shows all of the attributes for that item. Figure 15.5(b) shows
the schematic diagram, and Figure 15.6(b) shows a screenshot.
This item-based partition supports the abstract task of compari-
son across items and finding groups of similar items, rather than
comparison across attributes.
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 374 ===
ο ο
ο ο
15.4. VisDB 349
(a) (b)
Figure 15.6. VisDB screenshots with a dataset of eight attributes and 1000 items. (a) Attribute-based grouping with
one small-multiple view for each attribute. (b) Item-based grouping has a single combined view with multiattribute
glyph. From [Keim and Kriegel 94, Figure 6].
Both of these layouts use filtering for data reduction. When the
number of items is greater than the available room for the view,
items are filtered according to the relevance values. The total table
size handled by the system thus can be up to several million, even
though only one million items can be shown at once in a single
screen of one million pixels.
The small-multiples layout is effective for up to 10–12 attributes,
where each per-attribute view shows around 100,000 items, and
one million items are shown across all the views. In contrast, the
layout idiom using a single large glyph-based view only can handle
up to around 100,000 visible items, an order of magnitude fewer
than the other idiom. The elements within the glyph need to be
boxes larger than a single pixel in order to be salient, and glyphs
need borders around them in order to be distinguished from neigh-
boring ones.
VisDB is an early example of a very information-dense design
that tests the upper limits of useful information density. It is also a
very clear example of how different strategies for partitioning space
can be used to support different tasks.
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 375 ===
ο ο
ο ο
350 15. AnalysisCaseStudies
(a) (b)
Figure 15.7. VisDB layout orientation and colors. (a) Layouts are are ordere d
internally in a spiral emanating from the center. (b) The VisDB sequential color-
map uses multiple hues with monotonically increasing luminance. From [Keim an d
Kriegel 94, Figures 2 and 3].
System VisDB
What: Data Table (database) with k attributes; query return-
ing table subset (database query).
What: Derived k + 1 quantitative attributes per original item:
query relevance for the k original attributes plus
overall relevance.
Why: Tasks Characterize distribution within attribute, find
groups of similar values within attribute, find
outliers within attribute, find correlation be-
tween attributes, find similar items.
How: Encode Dense, space-filling; area marks in spiral lay-
out; colormap: categorical hues and ordered
luminance.
How: Facet Layout 1: partition by attribute into per-attribute
views, small multiples. Layout 2: partition by
items into per-item glyphs.
How: Reduce Filtering
Scale Attributes: one dozen. Total items: several mil-
lion. Visible items (using multiple views, in to-
tal): one million. Visible items (using glyphs):
100,000
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 376 ===
ο ο
ο ο
15.5. HierarchicalClusteringExplorer 351
15.5 Hierarchical Clustering Explorer
The Hierarchical Clustering Explorer (HCE) system supports sys-
tematic exploration of a multidimensional table with an associated
hierarchical clustering [Seo and Shneiderman 02, Seo and Shnei-
derman 05]. It was originally designed for the genomics domain
where the table reprents microarray measurements of gene expres-
sion. The original data is a multidimensional table with two key
attributes, genes and experimental conditions, and a single quan-
titative value attribute, measurements of the activity of each gene
under each experimental condition. The derived data is a clus-
ter hierarchy of the items based on a similarity measure bewteen
items.1
HCE is a good example of achieving scalability through carefully
designed combination of visual encoding and interaction idioms
in order to support datasets much larger than could be handled
by a single static view. The scalability target of HCE is between
100 and 20,000 gene attributes and between 2 and 80 experimen-
tal condition attributes. This target is reached with the reduc-
tion design choices of interactively controlled aggregation, filtering,
and navigation, and with the view coordination design choices of
overview–detail, small multiple, and multiform side-by-side views
with linked highlighting.
Figure 15.8 shows HCE on a genomics dataset. Two cluster
heatmap views are coordinated with the overview–detail design
choice, and scatterplot and histogram views provide different en- ‣ For more on cluster heat-
codings. maps, see Section 7.5.2.
The overview cluster heatmap at the top uses an aggregated rep-
resentation where an entire dataset of 3614 genes is shown with
fewer than 1500 pixels by replacing individual leaves with the av-
erage values of adjacent leaves. The density level of the overview
can be interactively changed by the user, for a tradeoff between an
aggregate view where some detail is lost but the entire display is
visible at once, and a more zoomed-in view where only some of the
columns are visible simultaneously and navigation by horizontal
panning is required to see the rest. The horizontal line through
the dendrogram labeled Minimum Similarity is an interactive filter-
ing control. Dragging it down vertically dynamically filters out the
columns in the heatmap that correspond to the parts of the den-
1 The clustering is computed outside the tool itself and is expected as input to
the system; for the purposes of this decompositional analysis, I consider it derived
rather than original data.
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 377 ===
ο ο
ο ο
352 15. AnalysisCaseStudies
Figure 15.8. Hierachical Clustering Explorer uses interactive aggregation and filtering for the scalable display of a
multidimensional table showing gene activity in different conditions using multiple overview+detail cluster heatmap
views. From [Seo and Shneiderman 02, Figure 2].
drogram above the bar and partitions the heatmap into pieces that
correspond to the number of clusters just below the bar.
The detail view at the bottom shows a heatmap of the cluster
selected in the top overview. It also shows the second dendrogram
for hierarchical clustering of the rows on the side; this dendro-
gram is not shown above in order to to maximize the number of
columns that can fit within the overview. The background of the
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 378 ===
ο ο
ο ο
15.5. HierarchicalClusteringExplorer 353
Figure 15.9. HCE on a demographics dataset showing the rank-by-feature idiom for systematic exploration of
pairwise combinations of attributes using a matrix overview and scatterplot. From [Seo and Shneiderman 05,
Figure 1].
selected cluster is highlighted in yellow in the overview, and the
correspondence between the views is emphasized by coloring the
column labels along the top of the detail view yellow as well, for
linked highlighting.
HCE has also been used for exploring datasets from other do-
mains, including census demographic information, as shown in
Figure 15.9. This screenshot focuses on the rank-by-feature id-
iom that combines the design choice of changing the order and the * Mapping the name of
reduction design choice of aggregation to guide exploration and this idiom into the vocabu-
achieve scalability. In this idiom, the data abstraction is aug- lary used in this book, rank
mented with many new derived attributes. Orderings for each is used as a synonym for
original attribute and pairwise combination of attributes are com- order, and feature means
puted for several choices of ordering criteria, and the user can either attribute or attribute
select which of them to use.* pair.
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 379 ===
ο ο
ο ο
354 15. AnalysisCaseStudies
Figure 15.10. Detail of HCE rank-by-feature views for ranking individual attributes
using a list overview and histogram/boxplot. From [Seo and Shneiderman 05,
Figure 2].
The results appear in three views, as shown at the bottom of
Figure 15.9 and in the detail screenshot in Figure 15.10. The lower
left of Figure 15.9 shows an aggregate compact view with the same
matrix alignment as a SPLOM, where each cell of the matrix has
only a single area mark colored by the chosen criterion with a di-
verging blue–white–brown colormap. On the left of Figure 15.10
is a compact aggregate overview display with list alignment that
matches the ordering used in the cluster heatmap, with the same
area mark coloring. In the middle of Figure 15.10 is an interme-
diate level of detail view for all attributes that shows them in a list
alignment that is both ordered and colored by the criterion. This
list is less compact, showing a middle level of detail for each at-
tribute, and thus it supports navigation through scrolling. On the
* Although the slider in the right is a detail view to show the full details for the selected at-
Figure 15.10 screenshot is tribute with a histogram as shown in Figure 15.10, or the selected
labeled Item Slider, in my attribute pair with a scatterplot as shown in Figure 15.9. The user
vocabulary it is being used can select by clicking on a cell in the list or matrix views or by flip-
to choose which attribute to ping through alternatives quickly using the single or double sliders
display in the detail view. in the respective detail views.*
System Hierarchical Clustering Explorer (HCE)
What: Data Multidimensional table: two categorical key at-
tributes (genes, conditions); one quantitative
value attribute (gene activity level in condition).
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 380 ===
ο ο
ο ο
15.6. PivotGraph 355
What: Derived Hierarchical clustering of table rows and
columns (for cluster heatmap); quantitative de-
rived attributes for each attribute and pairwise
attribute combination; quantitative derived at-
tribute for each ranking criterion and original at-
tribute combination.
Why: Tasks Find correlation between attributes; find clus-
ters, gaps, outliers, trends within items.
How: Encode Cluster heatmap, scatterplots, histograms, box-
plots. Rank-by-feature overviews: continuous
diverging colormaps on area marks in reorder-
able 2D matrix or 1D list alignment.
How: Reduce Dynamic filtering; dynamic aggregation.
How: Manipulate Navigate with pan/scroll.
How: Facet Multiform with linked highlighting and shared
spatial position; overview–detail with selection
in overview populating detail view.
Scale Genes (key attribute): 20,000. Conditions
(key attribute): 80. Gene activity in condition
(quantitative value attribute): 20,000 x 80 =
1,600,000.
15.6 PivotGraph
Connection, containment, and matrix views of networks are dif-
ferent visual encodings of the same data abstraction; they both
depict the link structure of a network. In contrast, the PivotGraph
idiom [Wattenberg 06] visually encodes a different data abstrac-
tion: a new network derived from the original one by aggregating
groups of nodes and links into a roll-up according to categorical
attribute values on the nodes. The user can also select attributes
of interest that filter the derived network. Roll-ups can be made
for up to two attributes at once; for two dimensions nodes are laid
out on a grid, and for one dimension they are laid out on a line.
Node positions in the grid are computed to minimize link-crossing
clutter, and the links between them are drawn as curves. The user
interactively explores the graph through roll-up and selection to
see visual encodings that directly summarize the high-level rela-
tionships between the attribute-based groups and can drill down
to see more details for any node or link on demand. When the
user chooses a different roll-up, an animated transition smoothly
interpolates between the two layouts.
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 381 ===
ο ο
ο ο
356 15. AnalysisCaseStudies
(a) (b)
Figure 15.11. The PivotGraph idiom. (a) Node–link view of small network with
two attributes on nodes: gender (M/F ) is encoded by node shape, and company
division (1/2 ) is encoded by grayscale value. (b) The schematic PivotGraph roll-up
of the same simple network where size of nodes and links of the derived graph
shows the number of items in these aggregated groups. From [Wattenberg 06,
Figure 4].
Figure 15.11 shows an example of a simple node–link drawing
in Figure 15.11(a) side by side with a PivotGraph roll-up in Fig-
ure 15.11(b). The network has two categorical attributes: gender,
shown with M for male and F for female, and company division,
shown with 1 or 2. In the node–link view, node shape represents
gender with squares for M and circles for F, and grayscale value
represents company division with black for 1 and gray for 2. The
full original network is shown, emphasizing its topological struc-
ture. In the PivotGraph view, the derived network has four nodes
that represent the four possible groups of the combination of these
two attributes: males in division 1 in the upper left, females in divi-
sion 1 in the upper right, males in division 2 on the lower left, and
females in division 2 on the lower right. The size of each of these
aggregate groups is encoded with node size. Similarly, a single link
in this derived graph represents the entire group of edges in the
original graph that linked items in these groups, and the size of
that group is encoded with line width. In this example, all possible
gender/division pairs are connected except for men and women in
division 2.
Figure 15.12 shows a more complex example rolled up by gen-
der and office locations; the dataset is an anonymized version of
a real corporate social network. Most of the cross-gender commu-
nication occurs in location B, and there are no women at location
A. An additional quantitative attribute is encoded with a diverging
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 382 ===
ο ο
ο ο
15.6. PivotGraph 357
Figure 15.12. PivotGraph on graph rolled up by gender and location, showing most cross-gender communication
occurs in location B. From [Wattenberg 06, Figure 5].
red–green colormap, the number of inward links versus outward
links at each node.
The PivotGraph idiom is highly scalable because it summarizes
an arbitrarily large number of nodes and links in the original net-
work, easily handling from thousands to millions. The visual com-
plexity of the derived network layout depends only on the number
of attribute levels for the two attributes chosen for roll-up.
PivotGraph complements the standard approaches to network
layout, node–link and matrix views, and thus could serve as one
of several linked multiform views in addition to being used on its
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 383 ===
ο ο
ο ο
358 15. AnalysisCaseStudies
own as a single view. PivotGraph is very well suited for the task of
‣ Section 9.4 compares the comparisons across attributes at the aggregate level, a task that is
strengths and weaknesses difficult with previous approaches. Conversely, it is poorly suited
of the standard approaches for understanding topological features of networks, a task that is
to network layout. easy with node–link views when the network is not too large.
Idiom PivotGraph
What: Data Network.
What: Derived Derived network of aggregate nodes and links
by roll-up into two chosen attributes.
Why: Tasks Cross-attribute comparison of node groups.
How: Encode Nodes linked with connection marks, size.
How: Manipulate Change: animated transitions.
How: Reduce Aggregation, filtering.
Scale Nodes/links in original network: unlimited. Roll-
up attributes: 2. Levels per roll-up attribute:
several, up to one dozen.
15.7 InterRing
The InterRing system [Yang et al. 02] for tree exploration uses a
space-filling, radial layout for visually encoding the hierarchy. The
interaction is built around a multifocus focus+context distortion
approach to change the amount of room allocated to different parts
of the hierarchy. Figure 15.13(a) shows the undisorted base layout.
Figure 15.13(b) shows that the result of enlarging the blue sub-
tree is shrinking the room allocated to its siblings. Figure 15.13(c)
shows a subsequent use of interactive distortion, where the tan
region is also enlarged for emphasis.
The proposed structure-based coloring redundantly emphasizes
the hierarchical information encoded spatially. Structure-based
coloring could be eliminated if InterRing is used as the only view,
in order to show a different attribute with color coding. Structure-
based coloring is particularly useful when shared color coding is
used to coordinate between multiple views, so that items are col-
ored by the tree hierarchy in other linked views with different spa-
tial layouts.
The scalability of InterRing is moderate; it handles hundreds
of nodes easily, where the leaf labels are large enough to read.
The space-filling geometric configuration yields about three times
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 384 ===
ο ο
ο ο
15.7. InterRing 359
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 15.13. The InterRing hierarchy vis idiom uses a space-filling radial visual encoding and distortion-based
focus+context interaction. (a) The hierarchy before distortion. (b) The blue selected subtree is enlarged. (c) A
second tan region is enlarged. From [Yang et al. 02, Figure 4].
as many legible labels as with a classical node–link layout using
labels of the same size. In the extreme case, where each leaf is
encoded with a single pixel and the idiom uses the entire screen,
InterRing could scale to several thousand nodes. The number of
edges in a tree is the same as the number of nodes, so there is no
need to separately analyze that aspect. Another useful factor to
consider with trees is the maximum tree depth supported by the
encoding; that is, the number of levels between the root and the
farthest away leaves. InterRing can handle up to several dozen
levels, whereas hundreds would be overwhelming.
In addition to being a viable single-view approach when tree ex-
ploration is the only task, InterRing is designed to work well with
other views where a hierarchy view should support selection, navi-
gation, and roll-up/drill-down operations. It also supports directly
editing the hierarchy itself. In contrast, many tree browsing sys-
tems do not support modification of the hierarchy.
System InterRing
What: Data Tree.
Why: Tasks Selection, rollup/drilldown, hierarchy editing.
How: Encode Radial, space-filling layout. Color by tree struc-
ture.
How: Facet Linked coloring and highlighting.
How: Reduce Embed: distort; multiple foci.
Scale Nodes: hundreds if labeled, thousands if
dense. Levels in tree: dozens.
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 385 ===
ο ο
ο ο
360 15. AnalysisCaseStudies
15.8 Constellation
The Constellation system [Munzner 00, Munzner et al. 99] supports
browsing a complex multilevel linguistic network. Several of the vi-
sual encoding decisions diverge from the traditional node–link net-
work layout. The perceptual impact of edge crossings is minimized
by using dynamic highlighting of a foreground layer rather than
by an algorithm to minimize crossings, allowing the use of spa-
tial position to encode two ordered attributes. Nodes in the graph
that have links to multiple subgraphs are duplicated within each
to maximize readability at the subgraph level. The traditional ap-
proach of drawing a node in only one location would increase the
cognitive load of understanding subgraph structure by requiring
too much tracing back and forth along links; the duplication is
signalled by dynamic highlighting on hover.
Constellation is an example of a highly specialized vis tool de-
signed for a very small audience to use for a limited period of time.
It was intended to support computational linguistics researchers
who were developing algorithms for traversing a very large network
created from an online dictionary. The tool was intended to “work
itself out of a job” and be abandoned after their algorithms were
fully tuned.
In this multilevel network, a low-level node represents a word
sense: the narrow meaning of a word used in a particular way,
where most words have multiple senses. For example, bank has
the two distinct meanings of a financial institution and the side of
a river. The metanodes at the next level of the graph each con-
tain a subgraph of around 10–12 nodes representing a dictionary
definition, with links between the headword node being defined,
and all of the leafword nodes used in the defining sentence. The
large-scale structure of the network arises from combining these
subgraphs together, since the same word may be used in many
different definitions: as a headword in one definition, and as leaf-
words in several others.
There is a categorical attribute for the relationship encoded by
each link, such as is-a or part-of. While there are in total a few
dozen possible values for this type, most are rarely used; we binned
this attribute into eight bins, preserving the seven most frequently
used types and combining all others into an eighth other category.
The linguistics researchers did not need to inspect the full net-
work; rather, they wanted to see the results of their query algo-
rithms that traversed the network, returning an ordered set of the
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 386 ===
ο ο
ο ο
15.8. Constellation 361
Figure 15.14. The Constellation high-level layout bases horizontal spatial posi-
tion on the plausibility attribute, where more room is allocated to definitions on
highly plausible and usually short paths on the left, and less room to those on less
plausible and typically longer paths on the right. From [Munzner 00, Figure 5.4].
top 10 or 50 highest-ranking paths between two words, a source
and a sink. The paths are ranked with the quantitative attribute of
plausibility, as computed by their traversal algorithms. Each path
consists of an ordered list of words, and attached to each of these
words is the set of all the definitions that were used during the
computation to place it within the path.
The primary task of the linguists was to hand-check the results
to see how well the computed plausibility matched up to their hu-
man intuition: were all high-ranking paths believable, and con-
versely were all believable paths highly ranked? The secondary
task was to check the data quality, to ensure that extremely com-
mon stop words had been appropriately excluded from the compu-
tation. The task abstraction is the consume-discover case, where
the search requirements include both browsing the high-ranking
paths and locating the low-belivability paths, and the querying
requirements include both identification and comparison. All of
these tasks require extensive reading of node labels.
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 387 ===
ο ο
ο ο
362 15. AnalysisCaseStudies
The high-level Constellation spatial layout is based on a curvi-
linear grid, where each path flows along a vertical column with the
words ordered from the source on top to the sink on the bottom,
and the horizontal order of the paths is determined by the plau-
sibility attribute with highly plausible ones on the left. The lay-
out is designed so that definitions on the plausible left side have
more room than those on the implausible right side, as shown
in Figure 15.14. Paths have different lengths, and less plausible
ones tend to be longer and have more definitions associated with
each word. Paths on the implausible right are given less horizontal
space. This variability leads to many empty cells in the base grid
shown in Figure 15.15(a); full cells are expanded both horizontally
as in Figure 15.15(b) and vertically as in Figure 15.15(c) to fill the
available space and achieve high information density.
The choice to use spatial position to encode information pre-
cludes algorithmic approaches to minimizing edge crossings. In-
stead, Constellation uses the design choice of superimposed dy-
namic layers to minimize the perceptual impact of crossings. Fig-
ure 15.16(a) shows an example of the background version of a def-
inition graph, while Figure 15.16(b) shows the foreground version.
Four different kinds of structures can be highlighted to create dif-
ferent constellations, motivating the system’s name: paths, defini-
tion graphs, all of the direct connections to a single word, and all
links of a particular type. Figure 15.17 shows a constellation with
all links of type Part highlighted. It also illustrates the “sideways T”
layout characteristic of a query where the source and sink words
are highly related, so all of the high-ranking paths are very short;
in this case, aspirin and headache.
The mid-level spatial layout handles a path segment : one word
in the path along with all of the definitions associated with it, us-
ing containment marks to show the hierarchical relationships. Fig-
ure 15.18(a) shows an example where the box allocated to the en-
tire segment is tan, and the path word has its own definition that
is also drawn in the tan section. Figure 15.18(b) shows an exam-
ple where the path word itself is not defined, but each of the other
definitions assigned to it is enclosed in a green box nested within
the tan segment.
The low-level spatial layout of a definition is illustrated in Fig-
ure 15.19(a). A ladder-like rectilinear structure encodes with both
spatial position and line marks. Each leafword is enclosed in
its own blue label box. Vertical lines show the hierarchical mi-
crostructure inside the definition and are colored white, and hori-
zontal edges are color coded to show the link type.
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 388 ===
О О
О О
15.8. Constellation 363
(a) (b)
(c)
Figure 15.15. Resizing grid cells to increase information density. (a) Base curvilinear grid. (b) After eliminating the
empty columns. (c) After eliminating empty cell rows in each column. From [Munzner 00, Figure 5.13].
О О
О О
=== PAGE 389 ===
ο ο
ο ο
364 15. AnalysisCaseStudies
(a) (b)
Figure 15.16. Constellation uses the design choice of dynamic superimposed layers. (a) Edges in the background
layer are not obtrusive. (b) The newly selected foreground layer is distinguished from the background with changes
of the size, luminance, and saturation channels. From [Munzner 00, Figure 5.5].
Figure 15.17. The constellation showing all relations of type Part is highlighted.
From [Munzner 00, Figure 5.16a].
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 390 ===
ο ο
ο ο
15.8. Constellation 365
(a) (b) (a) (b)
Figure 15.18. Mid-level Constellation path segment Figure 15.19. Low-level Constellation definition
layout, using containment to show hierarchical rela- layout, using rectilinear links and spatial position.
tionship between path word in tan and its associated (a) The base layout, with horizontal lines color-coded
definitions in green. (a) One of the definitions is for for link type. (b) Long-distance links are drawn be-
the path word itself. (b) Path word that is not it- tween the master version of the word and all of its
self defined, but only appears within other definitions. duplicated proxies. From [Munzner 00, Figure 5.10].
From [Munzner 00, Figure 5.9].
Each definition is drawn with all of its associated words in or-
der to make it easy to read, so any word that appears in multiple
definitions is duplicated. The master version of the word is the
one on the most plausible path, and is drawn in black. All sub-
sequent instances are proxies, which are drawn in gray and are
connected to the master by a long slanted line mark, as shown in
Figure 15.19(b).
Constellation is optimized for three different viewing levels: a
global view for interpath relationships, a local view for reading
individual definitions, and an intermediate view for associations
within path segments. It uses a subtle form of semantic zooming
to achieve this effect, where the amount of space devoted to differ-
ent classes of words changes dynamically depending on the zoom
level. Figure 15.20 shows three steps of a zoom animated transi-
tion sequence. In the first frame, the words at the top are given
much more space than the rest; in the last frame, the allocation of
space is nearly equal for all words.
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 391 ===
ο ο
ο ο
366 15. AnalysisCaseStudies
Figure 15.20. Constellation uses a subtle version of the semantic zooming design
choice, where the space allocated for the first word versus the rest of the definition
changes according to the zoom level. From [Munzner 00, Figure 5.19].
System Constellation
What: Data Three-level network of paths, subgraphs (defi-
nitions), and nodes (word senses).
Why: Tasks Discover/verify: browse and locate types of
paths, identify and compare.
How: Encode Containment and connection link marks, hori-
zontal spatial position for plausibility attribute,
vertical spatial position for order within path,
color links by type.
How: Manipulate Navigate: semantic zooming. Change: Ani-
mated transitions.
How: Reduce Superimpose dynamic layers.
Scale Paths: 10–50. Subgraphs: 1–30 per path.
Nodes: several thousand.
15.9 Further Reading
Graph-Theoretic Scagnostics Scagnostics builds on ideas originally pro-
posed by statisticians John and Paul Tukey [Wilkinson et al. 05,
Wilkinson and Wills 08].
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 392 ===
ο ο
ο ο
15.9. FurtherReading 367
VisDB The VisDB system was an early proposal of dense displays
for multidimensional tables [Keim and Kriegel 94].
Hierarchical Clustering Explorer Different aspects of the Hierarchical
Clustering Explorer system are described in a series of pa-
pers [Seo and Shneiderman 02, Seo and Shneiderman 05].
PivotGraph The PivotGraph system visually encodes a different de-
rived data abstraction than most network vis idioms [Watten-
berg 06].
InterRing The InterRing system supports hierarchy exploration
through focus+context interaction with geometric distortion
and multiple foci. [Yang et al. 02].
Constellation The Constellation system supports browsing a complex
multilevel network with a specialized layout and dynamic lay-
ering [Munzner et al. 99, Munzner 00].
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 393 ===
О О
О О
О О
О О
=== PAGE 394 ===
ο ο
ο ο
Figure Credits
Any figures not listed here are released under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license
(CC BY 4.0), to be credited as Tamara Munzner, with illustrations by Eamonn Maguire, Visualization
Analysis and Design, A K Peters Visualization Series, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2014.
Figure 1.1 Copyright c 2013 by IEEE.
О
Figure 1.2 Reproduced under Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial license (CC BY-NC
2.0).
Figure 1.4 Copyright c 2007 by IEEE.
О
Figure 1.5 Courtesy of Miriah Meyer.
Figure 1.6 Michael J. McGuffin and Jean-Marc Robert, Information Visualization (9:2) pp. 115-140,
copyright c 2010 by SAGE Publications. Reprinted by Permission of SAGE.
О
Figure 2.5 Courtesy of Miriah Meyer.
Figure 2.9 Courtesy of Miriah Meyer.
Figure 3.4 Copyright c 2008 by IEEE.
О
Figure 3.8(a) Courtesy of Catherine Plaisant.
Figure 3.8(b) [Munzner et al. 03] c 2003 Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. Reprinted by
О
permission.
Figure 3.10 Courtesy of David Auber.
Figure 3.12 Copyright c 1998 by IEEE.
О
Figure 4.3 Copyright c 2008 by IEEE.
О
Figure 4.6 Copyright c 2005 by IEEE.
О
Figure 4.8 Copyright c 2006 by IEEE.
О
Figure 4.10 Copyright c 2005 by IEEE.
О
Figure 4.12 [McLachlan et al. 08] c 2008 Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. Reprinted by
О
permission.
Figure 4.14 Springer, Graph Drawing, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 2912, 2004, pages 425-
436, “An Energy Model for Visual Graph Clustering,” Andreas Noack, Figure 1, copyright
c 2004 Springer. With kind permission from Springer Science and Business Media.
О
Original caption: Pseudo-random graph with intra-cluster edge probability 0.16 and inter-
cluster edge probability 0.02; left: LinLog model.
369
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 395 ===
ο ο
ο ο
370 FigureCredits
Figure 4.16 [Heer et al. 09] c 2010 Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. Reprinted by permis-
О
sion.
Figure 5.8 [Heer and Bostock 10] c 2010 Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. Reprinted by
О
permission.
Figure 5.9 Courtesy of TeleGeography, www.telegeography.com.
Figure 5.14 Courtesy of Edward H. Adelson. c 1995 Edward H. Adelson.
О
Figure 5.15 Courtesy of Dale Purves, http://www.purveslab.net/seeforyourself.
Figure 6.3 Copyright c 1996 by IEEE.
О
Figure 6.4 Courtesy of Stephen Few. An example of poor design, from http://perceptualedge.com/
files/GraphDesignIQ.html.
Figure 6.5 Copyright c 1996 by IEEE.
О
Figure 6.6 Copyright c 2007 by IEEE.
О
Figure 6.7 Copyright c 1999 by IEEE.
О
Figure 6.8 Copyright c 2010 by IEEE.
О
Figure 6.9 Copyright c 2007 by IEEE.
О
Figure 7.2 Copyright c 2008 by IEEE.
О
Figure 7.3 “A layered grammar of graphics,” Hadley Wickham, Journal of Computational and Graphical
Statistics 19:1 (2010), 3-28. Reprinted by permission of the American Statistical Associa-
tion (http://www.amstat.org).
Figure 7.5 Courtesy of Robert P. Bosch, Jr.
Figure 7.6 Copyright c 2008 by IEEE.
О
Figure 7.7 Copyright c 2008 by IEEE.
О
Figure 7.10 Copyright c 2006 by IEEE.
О
Figure 7.11 From http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Heatmap.png. Created by Miguel Andrade using
the program Cluster from Michael Eisen, which is available from http://rana.lbl.gov/
EisenSoftware.htm, with data extracted from the StemBase database of gene expression
data.
Figure 7.13 “Hyperdimensional Data Analysis Using Parallel Coordinates,” Edward J. Wegman, Journal
American Statistical Association 85:411 (1990), 664–675. Reprinted by permission of the
American Statistical Association (http://www.amstat.org).
Figure 7.14 Copyright c 1999 by IEEE.
О
Figure 7.15(a,b) “A layered grammar of graphics,” Hadley Wickham, Journal of Computational and Graph-
ical Statistics 19:1 (2010), 3-28. Reprinted by permission of the American Statistical Asso-
ciation (http://www.amstat.org).
Figure 7.17 “A layered grammar of graphics,” Hadley Wickham, Journal of Computational and Graphical
Statistics 19:1 (2010), 3-28. Reprinted by permission of the American Statistical Associa-
tion (http://www.amstat.org).
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 396 ===
О О
О О
FigureCredits 371
Figure 7.18 Courtesy of Michael Bostock, made with D3 [Bostock et al. 11]. From http://bl.ocks.
org/mbostock/3887235, http://bl.ocks.org/mbostock/3886208, and http://bl.ocks.org/
mbostock/3886394.
Figure 7.19 Copyright c 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
О
Figure 7.20 Courtesy of John Stasko.
Figure 8.2 Courtesy of Michael Bostock, made with D3 [Bostock et al. 11]. From http://bl.ocks.org/
mbostock/4060606.
Figure 8.3 Courtesy of Joe Kniss.
Figure 8.4 Courtesy of Land Information New Zealand Data Service (CC BY 3.0 NZ). From https://
data.linz.govt.nz/layer/768-nz-mainland-contours-topo-150k.
Figure 8.5 Copyright c 2004 by IEEE.
О
Figure 8.6 Copyright c 2004 by IEEE.
О
Figure 8.7 Copyright c 2005 by IEEE.
О
Figure 8.8 Reprinted from Computers and Graphics, Vol. 26, No. 2, Xavier Tricoche, Thomas Wis-
chgoll, Gerik Scheuermann, and Hans Hagen, “Topology tracking for the visualization of
time-dependent two-dimensional flows,” Pages 249–257, Copyright 2002, with permission
from Elsevier.
Figure 8.9 Copyright c 2013 by IEEE.
О
Figure 8.10 Copyright c 2005 by IEEE.
О
Figure 8.11 Courtesy of Gordon Kindlmann. From http://www.cs.utah.edu/ gk/papers/vis99/ppt/
~
slide03.html.
Figure 8.12 Copyright c 2004 by IEEE.
О
Figure 8.13 Copyright c 2004 by IEEE.
О
Figure 9.2(a) Springer, Graph Drawing, Lecture Notes in Computer Graphics 2528, 2002, pages 344–
353, “Improving Walkers Algorithm to Run in Linear Time,” Christoph Buchheim, Michael
Junger, and Sebastien Leipert, Figure 2d, copyright c 2002 Springer. With kind permis-
О
sion from Springer Science and Business Media.
Original caption: Extending the Reingold-Tilford algorithm to trees of unbounded degree.
Figure 9.2(b) Courtesy of Michael Bostock, made with D3 [Bostock et al. 11]. From http://mbostock.
github.com/d3/ex/tree.html.
Figure 9.3 Courtesy of David Auber, made with Tulip [Auber et al. 12].
Figure 9.4 Courtesy of Michael Bostock, made with D3 [Bostock et al. 11]. From http://bl.ocks.org/
mbostock/4062045 and http://bl.ocks.org/1062288.
Figure 9.5 From “A Gallery of Large Graphs,” JDG Homologycis-n4c6, b14 and b4. Courtesy of Yifan
Hu; see http://yifanhu.net/GALLERY/GRAPHS/citation.html.
Figure 9.6 Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Methods [Gehlenborg and
Wong 12], copyright 2012.
О О
О О
=== PAGE 397 ===
ο ο
ο ο
372 FigureCredits
Figure 9.7 Courtesy of Michael McGuffin, from http://www.michaelmcguffin.com/courses/vis/
patternsInAdjacencyMatrix.png.
Figure 9.8 Courtesy of David Auber, made with Tulip [Auber et al. 12].
Figure 9.9 Michael J. McGuffin and Jean-Marc Robert, Information Visualization (9:2) pp. 115–140,
copyright c 2010 by SAGE Publications. Reprinted by Permission of SAGE.
О
Figure 9.10 Copyright c 2008 by IEEE.
О
Figure 10.8 Reproduced under Creative Commons Attribution license (CC BY 2.0).
Figure 10.9 Copyright c 2012 by IEEE.
О
Figure 10.10 Copyright c 2012 by IEEE.
О
Figure 10.11 Copyright c 1998 by IEEE.
О
Figure 10.12 Copyright c 1995 by IEEE.
О
Figure 10.13 Courtesy of Gordon Kindlmann, from http://www.cs.utah.edu/ gk/lumFace.
~
Figure 11.2 Courtesy of Michael McGuffin, made using Tableau, http://tableausoftware.com.
Figure 11.3 Copyright c 2013 by IEEE.
О
Figure 11.4 Copyright c 2013 by IEEE.
О
Figure 11.5 Copyright c 2003 by IEEE.
О
Figure 11.6 Copyright c 2011 by IEEE.
О
Figure 11.7 [McLachlan et al. 08] c 2008 Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. Reprinted by
О
permission.
Figure 11.8 c 2008 Christian Rieder, Felix Ritter, Matthias Raspe, and Heinz-Otto Peitgen. Computer
О
Graphics Forum c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
О
Figure 11.9 Copyright c 1993 by IEEE.
О
Figure 12.2 Reproduced with permission from Graham Wills.
Figure 12.4 Copyright c 2003 by IEEE.
О
Figure 12.5 Copyright c 2008 by IEEE.
О
Figure 12.7 Reproduced under Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International license (CC
BY-SA 4.0); created by Chris Weaver of The University of Oklahoma, from http://www.cs.
ou.edu/ weaver/improvise/examples/census.
~
Figure 12.8 Courtesy of Michael Bostock, made with D3 [Bostock et al. 11]. From http://bl.ocks.org/
mbostock/3887051, after http://bl.ocks.org/mbostock/4679202.
Figure 12.9 “The Visual Design and Control of Trellis Display,” Ronald A. Becker, William S. Cleveland,
and Ming-Jen Shyu, Journal of Computational and Statistical Graphics 5:2 (1996), 123–
155. Reprinted by permission of the American Statistical Association (http://www.amstat.
org).
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 398 ===
ο ο
ο ο
FigureCredits 373
Figure 12.10 “The Visual Design and Control of Trellis Display,” Ronald A. Becker, William S. Cleveland,
and Ming-Jen Shyu, Journal of Computational and Statistical Graphics 5:2 (1996), 123–
155. Reprinted by permission of the American Statistical Association (http://www.amstat.
org).
Figure 12.11 Copyright c 2009 by IEEE.
О
Figure 12.12 Copyright c 2009 by IEEE.
О
Figure 12.13 From [Stone 10], courtesy of Maureen Stone; original color image by National Park Service,
http://www.nps.gov/pore/planyourvisit/upload/map pore areamap.pdf.
Figure 12.15 Copyright c 2010 by IEEE.
О
Figure 12.16 Copyright c 2006 by IEEE.
О
Figure 12.17 Reproduced under Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial license (CC BY-NC
2.0).
Figure 13.2 [Ahlberg and Shneiderman 94] c 1994 Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. Reprinted
О
by permission. Courtesy of Human-Computer Interaction Lab, University of Maryland.
Figure 13.3 Copyright c 2007 by IEEE.
О
Figure 13.4 Copyright c 2003 by IEEE.
О
Figure 13.6 Copyright c 2008 by IEEE.
О
Figure 13.7 “40 years of boxplots,” Hadley Wickham and Lisa Stryjewski, The American Statistician.
Reprinted by permission of the American Statistical Association (http://www.amstat.org).
Figure 13.8 Copyright c 1998 by IEEE.
О
Figure 13.9 Copyright c 1999 by IEEE.
О
Figure 13.10 Courtesy of Adrienne Gruver, Penn State Geography.
Figure 13.11 Copyright c 2007 by IEEE.
О
Figure 13.12 Copyright c 2009 by IEEE.
О
Figure 14.2 Copyright c 2004 by IEEE.
О
Figure 14.3 [Bier et al. 93] c 1993 Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. Reprinted by permis-
О
sion.
Figure 14.4 Copyright c 1997 by IEEE.
О
Figure 14.5 Courtesy of David Auber, made with Tulip [Auber et al. 12].
Figure 14.6 Copyright c 1998 by IEEE.
О
Figure 14.7 [Munzner et al. 03] c 2003 Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. Reprinted by
О
permission.
Figure 14.8 Copyright c 2006 by IEEE.
О
Figure 14.9 Copyright c 1998 by IEEE.
О
Figure 14.10 Copyright c 2010 by IEEE.
О
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 399 ===
ο ο
ο ο
374 FigureCredits
Figure 15.2 Copyright c 2005 by IEEE.
О
Figure 15.3 “Scagnostics Distributions,” Leland Wilkinson and Graham Wills, Journal of Computational
and Graphical Statistics (JCGS) 17:2 (2008), 473–491. Reprinted by permission of the
American Statistical Association (http://www.amstat.org).
Figures 15.4 and 15.1(a) Copyright c 2005 by IEEE.
О
Figure 15.5 Copyright c 1994 by IEEE.
О
Figures 15.6 and 15.1(b) Copyright c 1994 by IEEE.
О
Figure 15.7 Copyright c 1994 by IEEE.
О
Figure 15.8 Copyright c 2002 by IEEE. Courtesy of Human-Computer Interaction Lab, University of
О
Maryland.
Figures 15.9 and 15.1(c) Copyright c 2005 by IEEE. Courtesy of Human-Computer Interaction Lab,
О
University of Maryland.
Figure 15.10 Copyright c 2005 by IEEE. Courtesy of Human-Computer Interaction Lab, University of
О
Maryland.
Figure 15.11 [Wattenberg 06] c 2006 Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. Reprinted by permis-
О
sion.
Figures 15.12 and 15.1(d) [Wattenberg 06] c 2006 Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. Reprinted
О
by permission.
Figures 15.13 and 15.1(e) Copyright c 2002 by IEEE.
О
Figure 15.14–15.20 and 15.1(f) From the PhD thesis of Tamara Munzner [Munzner 00].
ο ο
ο ο
=== PAGE 400 ===
ο ο
ο ο
Bibliography
[Ahlberg and Shneiderman 94] Chris Ahlberg and Ben Shneiderman. “Visual Information Seeking:
Tight Coupling of Dynamic Query Filters with Starfield Displays.” In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI), pp. 313–317. ACM, 1994. DOI
10.1145/259963.260390. (pages 301, 302, 320, 373)
[Aigner et al. 11] Wolfgang Aigner, Silvia Miksch, Heidrun Schumann, and Christian Tominski. Visual-
ization of T ime-Oriented Data. Springer, 2011. (page 40)
[Amar et al. 05] Robert Amar, James Eagan, and John Stasko. “Low-Level Components of Analytic Activ-
ity in Information Visualization.” In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization
(InfoVis), pp. 111–117. IEEE Computer Society, 2005. (page 64)
[Andre and Wickens 95] Anthony D. Andre and Christopher D. Wickens. “When Users Want What’s Not
Best for Them.” Ergonomics in Design: The Quarterly of Human Factors Applications 3:4 (1995),
10–14. (page 129)
[Andrews 08] Keith Andrews. “Evaluation Comes in Many Guises.” AVI Workshop on BEyond time
and errors: novel evaLuation methods for Information Visualization (BELIV) Position Paper, 2008.
http://www.dis.uniroma1.it/beliv08/pospap/andrews.pdf. (page 79)
[Ankerst et al. 98] Michael Ankerst, Stefan Berchtold, and Daniel A. Keim. “Similarity Clustering of
Dimensions for an Enhanced Visualization of Multidimensional Data.” In Proceedings of the IEEE
Symposium on Information Visualization (InfoVis), pp. 52–60. IEEE Computer Society, 1998. (pages
305, 321)
[Anscombe 73] F.J. Anscombe. “Graphs in Statistical Analysis.” American Statistician 27 (1973), 17–21.
(pages 7, 8, 19)
[Archambault et al. 07a] Daniel Archambault, Tamara Munzner, and David Auber. “Grouse: Feature-
Based, Steerable Graph Hierarchy Exploration.” In Proceedings of the Eurographics/IEEE VGTC
Symposium on Visualization (EuroVis), pp. 67–74. Eurographics, 2007. (page 10)
[Archambault et al. 07b] Daniel Archambault, Tamara Munzner, and David Auber. “TopoLayout: Mul-
tilevel Graph Layout by Topological Features.” IEEE T ransactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics 13:2 (2007), 305–317. (page 216)
[Archambault et al. 08] Daniel Archambault, Tamara Munzner, and David Auber. “GrouseFlocks: Steer-
able Exploration of Graph Hierarchy Space.” IEEE T ransactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics 14:4 (2008), 900–913. (page 215)
375
ο ο
ο ο